
[Illustration: _Cordially Yours

Annie Wittenmyer_]




  UNDER THE GUNS

  A WOMAN’S REMINISCENCES
  OF
  THE CIVIL WAR

  BY
  MRS. ANNIE WITTENMYER

  AUTHOR OF “WOMAN’S WORK FOR JESUS,” “A JEWELLED MINISTRY,”
  “HISTORY OF THE TEMPERANCE CRUSADE,” “THE WOMEN OF
  THE REFORMATION,” AN HISTORICAL WORK, ETC.

  WITH AN
  INTRODUCTION
  BY
  MRS. GENERAL U. S. GRANT

  BOSTON, MASS.
  E. B. STILLINGS & CO., PUBLISHERS
  55 SUDBURY STREET
  1895




  COPYRIGHT,
  BY ANNIE WITTENMYER,
  1895.




  TO THE

  ARMY NURSES OF OUR RECENT CIVIL WAR,

  WHO WALKED AS ANGELS OF MERCY ON MANY
  BATTLE-FIELDS, AND MINISTERED TO
  THE SICK, WOUNDED, AND DYING, IN LOATHSOME,
  OVER-CROWDED HOSPITALS;

  AND TO THE

  NOBLE WOMEN OF IOWA

  WHO SO GENEROUSLY SUSTAINED ME IN MY ARMY WORK;

  AND TO THE

  PATRIOTIC WOMEN OF AMERICA

  WHO SENT THEIR HUSBANDS, BROTHERS, AND SONS TO
  THE DEFENCE OF THEIR COUNTRY WITH A
  DEVOTION AND COURAGE
  EQUAL TO THAT OF ANY GRECIAN MOTHER OR ROMAN MATRON,
  THIS VOLUME
  IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED BY THE
  AUTHOR.




PREFACE.


In preparing this little volume for publication, no attempt whatever
has been made to record, as facts of history, the military movements
of the army during our recent Civil War. The great captains, who led
the Union forces through the terrible conflict from Fort Sumter to
Appomattox, have already covered, to a large extent, the military
history of the war.

My purpose has been simply to bring out in connection with these great
military events, with which they were so intimately connected, a few of
the many incidents and heart histories that were crowded into my own
life, from April 20, 1861, to Nov. 23, 1865.

_The stories and reminiscences in this book are true to life, every one
of them._ They are told just as they occurred, without any attempt at
literary embellishment; and most of them can be substantiated by living
witnesses.

Camps and hospitals were established near my own home in Keokuk, Iowa,
early in April, 1861. I began at once my ministrations to the sick in
these newly established hospitals, and, during my daily visits, closed
the eyes of the first Iowa soldier who died in the war. From that time
on till the close of the war I was actively engaged all along the lines.

I was loyally and generously sustained by the women of Iowa; was
elected by the Iowa Legislature sanitary agent of the State; was
commissioned by Iowa’s grand old war governor, Samuel J. Kirkwood; was
furnished by Secretary Stanton with a pass to all parts of the field,
and government transportation for myself and supplies. This official
order of Mr. Stanton’s was supplemented by the following charge:--

  “It is especially enjoined upon all officers to furnish this lady
  every facility in carrying out her generous purposes, it being shown
  that she is worthy of great respect.”

I had also the co-operation of the Sanitary and Christian Commissions,
and the chief medical officers and government officials, so that I had
unusual facilities for doing good.

I was greatly indebted to General and Mrs. Grant for sympathy and aid.
When Mrs. Grant was at her husband’s headquarters the place was a
haven of rest for me, and a welcome always awaited me. Indeed, Mrs.
Grant would have joined me in the work, but her husband was afraid her
strength and sympathies would be overtaxed. During these brief visits I
learned to appreciate the unselfishness and noble qualities of General
Grant, and the strength and purity of his character; and the loveliness
and sterling worth of Mrs. Grant, and her wifely devotion.

I was also under great obligations to General John A. Logan, who
was ever ready to aid me. When it was almost impossible to get from
Bridgeport to Chattanooga, he sent me up in a little steamer which he
loaded with my supplies. Later, I met Mr. Orson, the president of the
United Telegraph Association; and General Logan introduced me with such
kindly appreciative words, that without a hint from either of us, he
filled out an order allowing me “to telegraph free to the end of the
war.” I still have that little order in my possession.

It is due our brave soldiers that I should say that I felt as safe in
their midst as I would have done in my own home, even though at times I
was the only woman in the midst of an army of twenty thousand fighting
men, as was the case at Milliken’s Bend, after the repulse of General
Sherman at Haines’ Bluff.

Not one impertinent or rude word was ever spoken to me in all those
years. No purer or grander army ever marched to the music of fife and
drum than the army that stood for the defence of our flag and the unity
of our government from 1861 to 1865.

A woman could walk in their midst in white, and a little child would
have been as safe as in its mother’s arms.

As I was all along the lines from Vicksburg to Petersburg, and was on
some of the bloodiest battle-fields, and as I followed Sherman’s army
along the fiery lines from Chattanooga to Atlanta, I necessarily had to
pass through many perils, and witness many exciting scenes. A few of
these stories I have now thought best to publish.

For more than twenty years my friends have urged their publication; but
I shrank from the task, because of their personal character.

In giving these simple, true stories to the public, I shall hope that
the same earnest, charitable spirit will be exercised by my readers as
I manifested toward the sick and wounded during my army work.

                                                       ANNIE WITTENMYER.

  SANATOGA, PA., _Dec. 3, 1894_.




INTRODUCTION.


The author of this most interesting and historic volume, Mrs. Annie
Wittenmyer, I very often met whilst on my frequent visits to the
headquarters of my husband, General Ulysses S. Grant.

She there on her mission of mercy as she came to the front with
supplies for the sick and wounded; I there simply to give the general a
glimpse of his dear ones (some of the children being always with me).
And I would gladly have joined Mrs. Wittenmyer in all her works of
devotion; but the general forbade it, saying, when I returned from the
hospitals ladened with petitions and heart-breaking stories, “Julia,
cease, cease; I cannot listen; I hear this all day, every day, and I
must have some rest from all this sorrow and misery. If you insist on
going again to the hospitals, I will have to send you home.”

Mrs. Wittenmyer was ever deeply interested in her efforts to relieve
suffering; ever appealing for the discharge of the brave men who
were made helpless by their wounds; ever braving dangers and enduring
hardships in the performance of her self-assumed, patriotic heart
duties.

I used to look upon this brave, heroic woman with profound respect and
admiration, which, if it were possible, has grown the greater in the
thirty years that have passed since then.

                                                       JULIA DENT GRANT.

  2108 R STREET, WASHINGTON, D.C.,
       _Nov. 27, 1894_.




CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE

  A Boy sent by Express, C. O. D.                                  5

  A But’ful Guv’ment Mule                                        226

  A Fighting Editor                                               86

  A Painful Accident                                             128

  A Perilous Ride                                                 11

  A Rich Reward for Services--Saving the Life of a Brother        72

  A Terrible Storm at Chattanooga                                 51

  A Visit from General Grant and General McPherson               174

  A Visit to Parson Brownlow                                      68

  A Visit to Captain Walke’s Gunboat                             190

  A Woman wounded in Battle                                       17

  A Young Nurse at Gettysburg                                    224

  Army Life at Helena, Arkansas                                   48

  Army Tricks                                                     41

  Blowing up of Fort Hill                                        102

  Braving Dangers                                                 21

  Bursting of a Shell behind my Carriage                         131

  Could you get me a Raw Onion and some Salt?                    230

  Exhibitions of Mother-love                                     142

  Fred D. Grant--The Brave Orderly at Vicksburg                  204

  General Grant’s Kindness                                        43

  Getting Two Thousand Sick and Wounded out of Helena            106

  Hardships of Camp-life at Vicksburg                            125

  Healed Soul and Body                                           152

  He died cheering the Flag                                      237

  Hospital Abuses--Putting Logwood in the Coffee                 193

  How I got the Cotton                                           244

  How Mother Bickerdyke cut Red Tape                              82

  How Pres. Lincoln received the News of Sheridan’s Victory      239

  I have the Best Mother in the World                            160

  I have the Comforter                                            98

  Johnnie Clem                                                    36

  Liberty Hicks                                                  181

  Meeting a Rebel Woman at Nashville                             134

  Memorial Day                                                   272

  Men who commanded Themselves and did not swear                 232

  My First Interview with General Grant                            1

  Not Time to send for the Colonel                                66

  Reminiscences of General Grant                                 202

  Running the Blockade at Vicksburg                               92

  Saved by a Bird                                                 78

  Saved by Lemonade                                               62

  Saving the Life of Young Pike                                  170

  Searching for the Dead                                         164

  Secretary Stanton’s Generous Gift                              251

  Sharing Poor Quarters with Dorothy L. Dix                      120

  The American Republic--its Glories and its Dangers             268

  The Clock at Vicksburg                                         115

  The First Soldiers wounded in the Civil War                     89

  The Hospitals of Vicksburg at the Time of the Surrender        186

  The Hospital at Point of Rocks, Va.                            209

  The New York Herald Reporter who lived for Two Worlds          156

  The Sad Fate of Jennie Wade                                    206

  The Sequel to “Uncle Tom’s Cabin”                              247

  The Special-diet Kitchen Work                                  259

  The Surrender of Vicksburg                                     147

  The Sweet Singer of the Hospitals                              217

  The Wonderful Potato-patch                                      58

  Trading Tobacco for Coffee                                     183

  Two Dreadful Days on the Battlefield. Shiloh                    28

  Very Timely Arrest                                             166

  Visiting Hospitals under the Guns                              138

  We honor Our Grand Old Heroes                                    4




  A WOMAN’S REMINISCENCES
  OF
  THE CIVIL WAR




UNDER THE GUNS.




MY FIRST INTERVIEW WITH GENERAL GRANT.


A large army had been thrown in and about Cairo, Ill., and General S.
R. Curtis of Iowa gave me a letter and a pass to go down and visit
the hospitals there. General Grant was in command, with headquarters
at Cairo. Fortunately for me, I had friends at that point. The great
hospitals were at Mound City, six miles above. I missed the boat
that plied between the two places at irregular hours, and my friends
proposed that we call upon General Grant. We found the modest, quiet,
uncrowned hero busy at his desk, with his staff and orderlies about
him. I was painfully conscious that I had no business of sufficient
importance to warrant such an intrusion upon the man who stood between
us and the army threatening that city that hour. I had not thought of
that before coming. But I felt very grateful to my friend, who came
at once to my aid, by explaining that I had come down from St. Louis
to visit the hospitals, and was the bearer of a letter and pass from
General Curtis, and that I also had a pass from General Frémont, and
had merely called to pay my respects.

We fell at once into pleasant conversation, and I found that the
General was personally acquainted with friends and relatives of my own.

“I will send you up to Mound City,” he said.

“Oh, don’t trouble yourself. I can go up to-morrow,” I urged.

But he was writing an order, and soon despatched an orderly with it to
Captain somebody. Immediately my pride took alarm. What if he should
send me to Mound City on one of those screaming, whistling little
tug-boats?

“Have you met my medical director?” he asked.

“No, I have not met him,” I was forced to answer.

“I will send him up with you,” and an orderly was despatched to command
his presence. Directly the boat was reported as ready; and the General
himself accompanied me to the boat--the _City of Memphis_--the largest
and finest steamer on the Mississippi River.

The General simply said, “Take this lady to Mound City, and remain
till she is ready to return. Wait for the Medical Director, and till I
leave the boat.” So I was for a little space of time the commander of
the biggest steamer on the Mississippi River. As I walked the length
of that great boat, so rich and gaudy in tinsel and curtains and
furniture, the patriotic blood coursed hotly through my veins. Why this
extravagance? Why this pomp and display? And when the medical director,
who was supposed to be in charge of all of the sick and dying in that
great army, came in full military dress, with gloves and sash and sword
and spurs, my heart sank down to zero. But I was not long in reaching
the truth, and changing my mind. A dozen boats or more had just been
impressed into the United States service, and lay there at the wharf
with steam up. They had not yet been dismantled; and it was the kindly,
proper thing to do to send me to Mound City, and it was military
etiquette for the medical director to dress as he did. I was afterwards
on the same boat many times; once after Sherman’s defeat at Yazoo, when
there were seven hundred and fifty wounded and sick soldiers on board.
General Grant was just gathering these boats, and these forces, that he
might move on Fort Donelson.




WE HONOR OUR GRAND OLD HEROES.

BY ANNIE WITTENMYER.


  We honor our grand old heroes
    Who stood in the thick of the fight,
  Where deadly missiles were flying,
    And valiantly fought for the right.

  They stood with God in the conflict,
    They fought on God’s side in the fray;
  The Lord and his angels helped them,
    And Freedom and Right won the day.

  Sacred to Freedom forever
    Is the soil where they fought and bled;
  No bondsman shall wear a shackle,
    No tyrant shall lift up his head.

  Above the flags of all nations
    Our beautiful banner floats high;
  Its stars like the stars of heaven,
    And its blue as blue as the sky.

  Long may it wave in its beauty,
    The symbol of Freedom and Right;
  Not a star be lost from its azure,
    Not a blot stain its spotless white!




A BOY SENT BY EXPRESS, C. O. D.


In the winter of 1862, just before General Grant moved upon Fort Henry
and Fort Donelson, I went out to Sedalia, Mo., with a heavy lot of
supplies.

Sedalia is 188 miles south-west of St. Louis, and was an important
military station at that time.

The people in that section were very disloyal and belligerent.

The train on which I journeyed was fired into three times the day I
made the journey, by “bushwhackers,” men who carried on an irregular
warfare.

The train was well guarded. There were at least fifty well-armed Union
soldiers on board to guard it, who took turns on the platform, ready to
spring off, gun in hand, if the train were attacked. But when a volley
was fired into the train, before the engineer could stop it, and the
soldiers could get started in pursuit, the enemy had mounted their
horses, and were far away. When the second volley crashed into the
train, a bullet passed through the window beside me, and whizzed very
near to my eyes. If it had come a little closer, it would have gone
through both of them. Fortunately I had just leaned back against the
seat; for if I had been sitting in an upright position, as I was a few
moments before, the ball would have gone through my head.

A mother and her little girl, who was five or six years old, sat in the
seat in front of me. The poor little child was so terrified that she
tried to hide under the seat. Her appeals, as she lifted her beautiful
tear-stained face, were very touching.

“Do you think they’ll fire again, mamma?”

“I hope not, my darling,” and the mother would tenderly cover her with
the skirts of her dress, and try to soothe her.

“O mamma! do get down on the floor; if you don’t, you might get killed.”

It was pitiful to see a child in such terror, crouching on the floor.

We did not reach Sedalia till midnight, and it was not till the train
drew up at the station that the child could be comforted.

The next morning early I went into the nearest hospital. The building
was an old, dilapidated frame structure, that had been used as a store.
Scores of wounded and sick men were crowded into these poor narrow
quarters.

But it is not my purpose just now to speak of them, or of the hospital
management, but of a child I found there.

He was lying on a cot in a little back room. They called him “Willie.”
He said he was “goin’ on eight;” but if he was that old, he was very
small of his age. His face was wondrous fair and beautiful, and his
hair hung in golden ringlets about his head. He had been very ill, and
was still too weak to leave his bed. But he was bright and happy, and
a great favorite with the men, who, lying on their beds, whittled toys
for Willie with their pocket-knives out of anything they could utilize
for that purpose, such as sticks and bones.

I took a great deal of pains to ascertain the facts about the boy. He
was a fatherless, motherless child, who had followed the soldiers when
they marched away from the town where he was temporarily staying. No
one cared, and no one followed to bring him back, and so he went on
with them.

The simple story, as he told it, seemed to be sustained by the facts I
afterwards gathered.

“I wanted to go to the war,” he said; “I had no mother, and I did not
want to stay at that place. I did not like the people, so when the
soldiers went to the war I went too. Some of the men said, that first
day, ‘Little boy, you had better run back home;’ but I told them I had
no home, that my mother was dead, and that I was not going back; that
I was going to the war, so they put me in a wagon to ride. At night I
had no place to sleep; but a man who said he had a little boy at home,
about as big as me, said I could sleep with him, and he hugged me up
under his blanket.

“Then after that I had a place in a wagon, the colonel said I might.
Sometimes I rode on the horses behind the big officers. But they
wouldn’t let me go to fight; they made me stay back in the wagon. I
didn’t like that; I wanted to go to the fights.”

A few days after I found Willie I was in the hospital, when a gentleman
came in seeking some one. He was from Ohio. He happened to see Willie,
and was wonderfully attracted to the child, and Willie seemed to take
a great fancy to the gentleman. He came daily to see Willie during his
stay in Sedalia. “This child,” he said to me one day, with tears in his
eyes, “looks so much like my own boy, my only child, who died a few
months ago, that I want to adopt him if my wife will consent. But her
heart is so nearly broken by grief, that she may shrink from the plan.”

I told him that I, too, had taken a great fancy to the boy, and had
determined that he should have a good home, and that through my friend,
General Curtis, who commanded at St. Louis, I should hold the boy till
the best of references were furnished. To this he made no objections;
and as soon as he reached St. Louis he sent the very best indorsements,
furnishing the most ample evidence that he was in every way worthy
of such a charge, as he was a wealthy Christian gentleman. Dr. Irwin,
Acting Medical Director, readily concurred; and it was agreed that if,
when the boy was able to travel, they wanted him, he should be sent.

Soon after he reached home, a telegram came: “All right--send Willie
by express, C. O. D.” (collect on delivery). When the contents of the
telegram became known, there was great excitement among the patients.
How could they part with Willie? And yet as he was to have a good home
they rejoiced with Willie, who was delighted with the news that he was
to go.

As soon as he was able to travel, we prepared him for the journey. His
name and address, and name and address of the gentleman to whom we
were sending him, were written with ink on white muslin, and sewed to
his coat and jacket, and on the shawl we wrapped about him, and on the
blanket we bundled him up in.

A stalwart expressman came for him, and, after giving a regular receipt
for him, took him up in his arms to carry him away. Dr. Irwin and the
surgeons of the hospital, and even the nurses and cooks, all came to
bid Willie good-by. His farewells were very touching.

When he was carried from his little room out into the main ward, a few
golden curls lay out on the folds of the coarse gray blanket, and his
laughing eyes turned kindly from one to another, as they called to him:
“Good-by, Willie!” “Be a good boy, Willie.” “Don’t forget me, Willie.”

As we were about to pass through the last door-way, Willie, who had
said “good-by” to each one as they greeted him, called out at the top
of his voice, “_Good-by, everybody_.” There was a chorus of good-bys in
response; but an Irishman by the door was heard above them all, as he
said:--

“Good luck to ye now! and may ye live a hundred years, and get into
heaven afore the Divil has a chance at ye.”

We accompanied him to the train, the surgeons and myself, and saw him
safely aboard with his luncheon; and we stood there together in silence
as the train pulled out, for a vacancy was felt in every heart.

A telegram was received a few days later, telling us that Willie had
arrived safely.

A great deal was crowded into the next few months. Battle after battle
followed. Fort Henry and Fort Donelson had fallen, Nashville had
surrendered, the bloody struggle at Pittsburg Landing had taken place,
and the Union forces had taken possession of Corinth, Miss.; but Willie
was not forgotten.

The gentleman adopted him as his own child, and his wife was greatly
comforted by the presence and love of little Willie.




A PERILOUS RIDE.


In digging the ship canal across the point opposite Vicksburg, hundreds
of men were killed or wounded in the great trench. By long practice the
gunners on the bluffs of Vicksburg acquired the ability to drop a shell
into the great ditch, causing terrible slaughter. The heavy guns of
the Union forces answered the enemy’s batteries, but failed to silence
them. “Whistling Dick,” as we all soon learned to call one great cannon
used by the enemy, kept the music going night and day. The loud, clear,
musical whistle which accompanied every discharge won for that gun the
attention of all. “Whistling Dick” was a gun of long range, and was
effective in execution, especially along the canal. But one day, after
a loud, sharp whistle, there was an explosion, and “Whistling Dick” was
heard no more. The work of death went on, however; for there were other
effective guns, and the most determined resistance to the project of
the Union troops was shown.

The wounded soldiers were taken to a hospital hastily improvised at a
point just opposite Vicksburg, where, although more than a mile nearer
the enemy, with only the Mississippi River between them, they were
nevertheless comparatively safe, being protected by a high embankment.
I had been sending supplies to this little hospital with lavish hand.
It seemed dreadful that wounded men should lie there night and day
under the guns of two armies, the battle always on, the shriek and
thunder of shell and shot over them, and all around them, and shaking
the very earth on which they lay. Weary, homesick, and suffering, they
were isolated from the army and from all other companionship, except
that of the surgeon and his force of detailed soldiers. But this
surgeon (I have forgotten his name, or I would mention it with the
highest respect) was a thoughtful and kind-hearted man, who desired
the best for his men and heartily sympathized with them. One day he
came into my quarters on the Sanitary boat with radiant face. He had
thought of something which would please his “boys,” and that was that I
should visit them. At first the thing seemed impossible. The distance
was many miles. I could not go in an ambulance, or on foot, and the
dangers of the journey were appalling. But he had thought of all that,
and explained the whole scheme. He could get a good, safe horse, and I
could ride on a cavalry saddle; and although there was some water in
the canal, and the banks were steep, the crossing was entirely safe,
and there were places where the horse could climb.

I could not refuse to go to the men who had faced the cannon, and gone
down wounded and helpless to the gates of death for my country and my
flag. General Cyrus Bussey, who was afterwards the Assistant-Secretary
of the Department of the Interior, and his plucky, lovely little wife,
who is now among the glorified in heaven, volunteered to accompany
me. Mrs. Bussey had her own horse and a side-saddle. I had a great
raw-boned animal, which looked as though he had been in several wars,
with a good new cavalry saddle, which some officer had kindly lent for
the occasion. “This horse is good and safe,” the surgeon explained, by
way of apology; “they say he wouldn’t shy or jump if a shell burst just
before him.”

The guns of two armies were screaming over us when we reached the point
which our guide designated as “the safe place to cross the canal.” He
did not know that some of the barriers at the mouth of the canal had
given way, and that the water in the canal was several feet deeper than
when he had crossed that morning. The tide was swift and turbulent; but
the surgeon said cheerfully, “It’s perfectly safe; just follow me.” The
next moment his horse went down into the muddy, swirling flood, and,
struggling heroically, swam to the opposite shore.

The surgeon called back to us that he had missed the crossing, and
designated a point a little higher up, which, as he said, “was
perfectly safe.” I had misgivings, but, settling myself well in the
saddle, gave the horse loose rein. He marched bravely in, and went
down into the flood with a plunge. General Bussey, fearing I would
be drowned, spurred his horse in after me, and the two brave animals
struggled together until we reached the opposite shore. Thanks to my
Kentucky training, I kept the saddle, and the only damage done was a
good drenching.

As General Bussey expressed a wish that Mrs. Bussey should not
attempt to cross, she remained at a cabin near by, which was somewhat
protected, till we returned.

Reaching the embankment opposite Vicksburg we scattered, the surgeon
taking the lead. I followed about fifty yards behind him, and General
Bussey about fifty yards behind me. The road was fair, and we flew over
that stretch at a full gallop. My shaggy, raw-boned steed made good
time. It was a wild ride. We were surrounded by batteries. The mortar
boats of the Union army, placed as near to Vicksburg as possible, were
sending their uncertain shells thundering over our heads into the
doomed city with deafening fury. The heavy guns along the heights of
Vicksburg were answering the long line of batteries and heavy mounted
guns on our side of the river; and only the river lay between us and
the enemies’ works. Shot and shell screamed over us. Sometimes it
seemed as if the sky was torn to pieces above us; but my horse did not
flinch. On and on we went, in a full gallop. If a gun was levelled at
us that day from any of the near batteries, we were not in range when
the shot came over, and so we reached the hospital in safety.

What shall I say of this hospital? What can I say of these wounded,
suffering men? Language is inadequate to describe their condition.
Longing for home and mother, for human sympathy, their moans were
answered only by the guns. They longed for quiet and sleep, but the
guns of two armies were thundering night and day over their heads. How
could flesh and blood, brain and nerve, endure it? My garments were
still dripping, but I went from cot to cot to speak the words of cheer.
The men tried to express their thanks for my coming in a befitting
manner; but their “God bless you for coming!” was choked with tears. As
I saw those brave men lying there weak and helpless, and every nerve
racked with the thunders of battle, I could not beat back my own tears.
Indeed, as I live it all over again, and write of it, the tears will
come again, although more than thirty years have rolled by since that
time. I sobbed out as best I could: “God bless you, boys; keep good
courage. I will get you out of this if it is possible.”

The return trip was safely made. Again we swam the canal; Mrs.
Bussey joined us, and we returned to camp. The next morning I called
on General Grant, and reported the condition of these wounded men.
General Grant was most thoughtful and careful of his sick and wounded.
He took in the situation at once. Calling Rawlins, he said, “Those
wounded men must be moved from the Point right away. Send an order to
the medical director to that effect.” And that night, under the cover
of the darkness, they were removed to hospitals at Milliken’s Bend,
twenty-five miles away from the belching batteries.




A WOMAN WOUNDED IN BATTLE.


A woman who had served as a private soldier in the ranks was severely
wounded and taken prisoner at Chickamauga. She fell in a charge made
upon the Confederates; and as the troops immediately fell back she was
left with the other wounded on the field, in the enemy’s lines. As she
was dressed as the other soldiers were, her sex was not discovered till
she was under a surgeon’s care in the hospital. She was wounded in the
thigh. No bones were broken; but it was a deep, ugly flesh wound, as if
torn by a fragment of a shell.

A day or two afterwards she was sent with a flag of truce into the
Union lines.

The sum and substance of the official message sent with this woman
was: “As the Confederates do not use women in war, this woman, wounded
in battle, is returned to you.” There was great indignation in the
regiment to which this woman belonged; and officers and men hastened to
protest, that, although she had been with them for more than a year,
not one in the regiment suspicioned that she was a woman. She stood
the long, hard marches, did full duty on the picket-line and in camp,
and had fought well in all the battles in which the regiment took part.
She was in the hospital at Chattanooga for some time, where I first met
her. When she was able to bear the transportation, she was removed to
a hospital at Nashville. I met her there again and again, and tried to
ascertain why she had enlisted.

“Had you a husband in the regiment?” I questioned.

“No.”

“A lover or friend?”

“No, I didn’t know any of them.”

“Well, why did you enlist?”

“I thought I’d like camp-life, and I did.”

“You did your full share of the hard work, I am told, marching, going
on picket duty, and chopping wood?”

“Yes; I was put on detail just like the others, and I never made any
excuse. I was awfully afraid they would find me out, and then I’d have
to go.”

“But they did not find you out?”

“No; not till I was wounded. The most I care about now is that they
won’t let me go back.”

“Where did you come from? and what is your real name?”

“I don’t want to tell, and I sha’n’t tell, either.”

When she was able to sit up the question of clothing became an
important one. The surgeon said, “She must have women’s clothes to put
on.” We women from the North, by gift and by purchase, provided the
necessary outfit for a woman’s wardrobe. To raise some funds for her we
had her photograph taken, first in the uniform of a private soldier,
and then dressed as a woman. She sold them to soldiers and visitors for
twenty-five cents each, and raised considerable money. I have the two
I purchased, which I have treasured in my war album all these years.
She was stout and muscular, with heavy features, high cheek bones, and
her black abundant hair was cut very close. She was perhaps twenty-six
or twenty-eight years old, but when in her military rig looked like a
beardless boy.

The time came at last when she must be dismissed from the hospital;
and I was commissioned by the officers to find out all I could about
her, and where she lived, as she had been more friendly to me than to
the others. The interview was a long one. I can give only the main
points. “The time has come,” I said, “when you must be sent out of the
hospital. Where do you wish to go?”

“I’ll stay in Nashville,” she answered.

“But you can’t stay in Nashville. This city is within the military
lines, and no one can come in, stay here, or go out of this town,
without a pass. You have come into these lines in disguise as a
soldier, but you are now known. So if you will not go willingly, you
will be sent out in charge of a provost marshal. That is, you will be
taken under arrest by the government officers to Louisville, and left
there. Then what will you do? You are not strong enough to do hard
work, and I doubt if you could get any work there to do.”

“I’m awfully sorry I can’t go back into the army.”

“You certainly cannot, the case is too well known; and recruiting
officers have been warned, and will be on the lookout hereafter. If you
will give your name and place of residence, the government will send
you home, and the trip will not cost you anything.”

“If I tell you my name, and the place I wish to go to, will you keep it
a secret?”

“I will be obliged to tell the officers.”

“Will you ask them not to publish it?”

“I certainly will; and I will never tell it to any one, except the
officers from whom I will get the order for pass and transportation.”

“I will trust you,” she said; and she whispered her name and residence.
Two days after that she was on her way to her home in the Northwest.

I never knew what became of her.




BRAVING DANGERS.


In December, 1862, General W. T. Sherman gathered his forces at the
landing at Helena, Ark., and on the 21st of the month the great
fleet, with flags flying, moved down the Mississippi River. A very
strict order had been issued by him against any citizen or reporter
accompanying the expedition; and severe penalties were threatened in
case the order should be disobeyed.

It was well known that the movement was against Vicksburg, but the
bravest reporter feared to defy that order.

As some time passed without news of Sherman’s army, the _Blue Wing_
was sent down with communications, but she was captured by the
Confederates. The government finally decided to send down two gunboats
and the _White Cloud_, a wooden steamer. I at once asked the privilege
of loading the _White Cloud_ with sanitary supplies. Mr. Plattenburg,
agent of the Sanitary Commission, who was also at Helena, had a heavy
lot of supplies.

As I had a pass for myself and all goods, from the Secretary of War,
I had no trouble in securing a passage on the _White Cloud_. I do not
recall as to how Mr. Plattenburg secured the privilege of going with
the little expedition; I only know that he went, and that the boat was
loaded with our supplies.

Thousands of soldiers were about the landing when our little fleet
moved out with banners flying. We all knew that untold dangers were
before us. And our heroism created the greatest enthusiasm. When the
_White Cloud_ moved out into the channel and turned her prow down
stream, I stepped out “on the guards” to take a last look at Helena.
My appearance was greeted with such an outburst of applause from the
thousands on the wharf that I fled to the cabin, after waving my
handkerchief in acknowledgment of the salute.

We were fired into frequently from the banks. Whenever we reached a
point of especial danger the _White Cloud was sent eight or ten miles
in advance so as to draw the enemy’s fire_, and thus uncover his
batteries; for it was not likely that if the gunboats were in sight we
would be attacked. Every moment, night and day, we were in expectation
of shot or shell from some concealed battery from the shore. But they
had been forewarned that the gunboats were coming, and so did not
attempt to capture the _White Cloud_. The sharpshooters on the shore
fired into us again and again. No one was killed; but sleep and
rest were impossible, and there were many narrow escapes. We reached
Milliken’s Bend one morning about daylight, to find General Sherman’s
army quartered there.

There was a great fleet of boats, and the sick and wounded were on
them. A tugboat was detailed to me; and I went with my supplies from
boat to boat, distributing such comforts and delicacies as I had,
to the men who had been wounded in the fight near Vicksburg. It was
decided by the medical authorities to send a steamer up the river with
a load of the wounded at once. The _City of Memphis_, the largest
steamer on the Mississippi River, was selected for this purpose. A
regiment and a battery were removed from the boat, and she was put in
order; that is, the filth was shovelled overboard.

I was told by a chaplain at the time that there were so many of our
men dying that the firing of salutes over their graves was ordered
discontinued. The constant noise of funerals was demoralizing. During
the afternoon the boat was loaded up with the worst patients on the
several boats. They were placed in the berths, and under the berths,
and on the floor, and out upon the guards. Wherever there was a place
where a fever-stricken, or a torn and broken body could be laid, it was
occupied. About seven hundred and fifty were put on board.

The sun was sinking;-behind the long, low line of cypress trees,
festooned with their trailing mosses, when our boat turned her prow up
the Mississippi River.

Long rows of men lay on the floor with their knapsacks for their
pillows. Among them was a Missouri soldier, severely wounded and
delirious, who all the night long called piteously for his sister.

His cry, “O sister!” was so plaintive and pathetic that I would go to
him every little while and ask,

“What do you want?”

“I am glad you have come--I want a drink of water.”

When the water was given he would remain quiet for a little time.
The next morning, as soon as it was light, he was taken to the
amputating-table, and one of his limbs sawed off above the knee. He
sank very low under the operation--so low that no attempt was made
to remove him from the table. The surgeon in charge said to me, “Get
him to take some food or drink if you can; he is sinking very fast.”
I offered him every delicacy in my possession, but he turned away in
disgust. There had been some of my supplies transferred to this boat.
While working with the men on the lower deck, and helping dress their
wounds, I found a barrel of sauer-kraut. I allowed the attendants to
open it; but afterwards, as I came up to the upper cabin, I called the
surgeon’s attention to it, so as not to be blamed in the matter if the
results were bad.

It happened that I met him near the amputating-table. As I passed the
patient I turned to give him a sympathetic look. He beckoned to me, and
I hastened to him. “I want some kraut,” he said.

I stepped over to where the surgeon was ministering to a man, and
questioned as to whether it was best to grant his request. “Give him
anything he wants--he can’t live anyway,” was his answer. I sent an
attendant down to get the kraut; and he brought up a big tin cup full,
and placed it on his breast and went his way.

Shortly afterwards, passing that way, I noticed him, feebly, ravenously
trailing the kraut to his mouth; and I never saw any one eat as much
kraut as he did in my life. He never stopped till he emptied the cup.
No one attempted to hinder him, as it was expected he would die soon.
From that hour he began to mend, and by the time we reached St. Louis
his case was considered hopeful.

Months afterwards, as I was passing through one of the St. Louis
hospitals, I heard the _thud, thud_, of crutches coming after me. I
turned to see who was following me; and a merry voice greeted me,
“Here’s your sauer-kraut man! Here’s your sauer-kraut man!” And there,
sure enough, was my Missouri soldier, able to get around lively on
crutches, and as blithe and merry as though he had never felt the keen
edge of the surgeon’s knife.

The dangers and hardships of that trip can never be forgotten. There
were many touching incidents. If this little story falls under the eyes
of that Missouri soldier, I would like to hear from him.

He told me, that day that I last met him, his story, which was full of
the pathos of home love and tender sacrifices. He was the youngest of
his father’s family; and they did not want to spare him to the country,
though they were loyal to the Stars and Stripes. But the lawless bands
of marauders, who were significantly called “Bushwhackers,” were
prowling over the State of Missouri, and his life was unsafe. He did
not venture to sleep in a house for months before he left his home,
and at last sleeping in the bushes became dangerous. Several times,
as he was asleep out in the undergrowth, he narrowly escaped the
bushwhackers, who were seeking him. I never saw him again, but hope he
got back to his own home safely.

During the trip up to Cairo twenty died, one with lockjaw. It was
pitiful to see a great stalwart man deprived of the power of speech,
starving to death. Not one particle of food could pass between his
closely-set teeth. His mind was clear, and daily he wrote out his
requests in regard to his friends and other matters.

Never was ocean traveller gladder to see the headlands of his own
native country than were we to see Cairo. A company of ladies came on
board, fresh nurses and surgeons were obtained, also comforts for the
wounded in the shape of cots, mattresses, etc. Many of the patients
were removed from the overcrowded boat into comfortable hospitals
at Cairo, thus relieving all parties. As soon as the boat landed,
I went to the house of a friend; and as I had not had one hour of
unbroken sleep for about ten days, I redeemed the time by taking a nap
thirty-six hours long.




TWO DREADFUL DAYS ON THE BATTLEFIELD. SHILOH.


The hospital steamer on which myself and two other ladies took passage
to Pittsburg Landing from Cairo, Ill., reaching Savannah, Tenn., eight
miles below there, about four o’clock A.M., April 7. There we heard the
news of the terrible battle that had been fought the day before. Some
said: “The Union army is defeated and driven to the very banks of the
river, and are all likely to be captured to-day.” We were soon out of
our berths and on the outlook. The boat, with a full head of steam,
made all possible speed to reach Pittsburg Landing.

Two gunboats, the _Tyler_ and the _Lexington_, lay out in the stream,
sending shot and shell over the heads of the Union Army into the
Confederate ranks. As the boat steamed up to the Landing, where already
a great fleet of steamers was lying, the shells went screaming over our
heads with deafening fury. All was in seeming confusion at the Landing.
The roadways, dug out of the steep bank, were insufficient for such
an emergency. In the hard fight on the day before, a vast amount of
ammunition had been used, and the officers all well knew that with the
dawn of the coming day the battle would be renewed with desperate fury.
Every teamster was, therefore, doing his utmost to get ammunition and
provisions to the front. They would bring their mules to the steep,
roadless bank, that stood at an angle of forty-five degrees; and while
the driver held the lines with a strong, steady hand, and set his boot
heels so as to keep a standing position as he ploughed his way to the
bottom, his mules put their little front feet down, settled themselves
on their haunches, on which the wagon rested, and skeeted to the bottom
with the driver. It was a wild sight. Each teamster had an assistant
who held a torch made of pine. Hundreds of torches lighted up the black
night. There was a clamor that cannot be described in the loading up,
and a steady stream of loaded wagons going up the hill by the regular
roadways.

As soon as the first rays of the morning light made objects distinct,
the firing began. Both armies had rested, face to face, on their arms,
and a hasty breakfast had been snatched of what they could get before
daylight, for all well knew that a bloody day was before them. Each
man, as he lifted his head from the ground where he had pillowed it the
night before, wondered if he should live to see the setting of another
sun.

Our hospital boat was lying alongside of other steamers. The rain
was falling steadily. We could hear the heavy guns, the screaming of
the shells, the thunder of the battle going on near by. As the light
increased, we shivered to see the wounded lying on bags of grain and
out on the guards, and the dead, who had been carried from the boats,
lying mangled and bloody along the shore of the river. At first we
could only cover our faces with our hands in a shiver and chill of
agony, in the attempt to hide the horrid sights of war from our eyes.

But as we stood there a feeble hand was lifted, and a feeble voice
called out,--

“Say, lady! Can’t you bring me a drink of water?”

Immediately a hundred hands were lifted. We could scarcely see them in
the faint light of the early morning, but we could hear the voices.

“Bring me some water.”

“Bring me something to eat.”

I called out cheerily,--

“Yes, yes; _we’ll help you all we can_.”

It was a great relief to have something to do. We went with gladness to
our work. I was the pioneer, and went right onto the boat lying nearest.

The surgeon in charge of our hospital boat had gone off to the field.
There was no one in authority left on the boat, and we took possession.

I had several boxes of canned oysters, and three or four barrels of
crackers, but we soon exhausted these; then we began on the beef in the
storeroom.

Barrels of soup were made and distributed. The other two ladies made
the soup, and I distributed it from boat to boat, and from one to
another. Oh, the sights and scenes I witnessed that day!

As I was carrying a bucket of soup across a gang-plank, an officer met
me. He came bounding forward, with his sword clanging by his side.

“Madam,” he said, “what are you doing?”

I was startled nearly out of my wits, but I managed to say,--

“I am carrying soup to the wounded.”

“Why, you ought not to do that. See here, soldier, I detail you to
carry soup for this woman.”

The soldier sprang forward and took the bucket of soup from my hand,
and the officer went on. I never knew who he was. If this falls under
his eyes, I want to thank him for his thoughtfulness. On and on, all
day, I went with my assistant, while the two lady helpers worked as
fast as they possibly could, to get the food ready.

The distribution of food was very rapid. Men with broken legs and
arms and gashed faces would hold out their tin cups or canteens to be
filled. The tin cups were easily filled, but the canteens took longer.
When they saw us coming, they would pound on the floor or on the side
of the boat, calling piteously,--

“_Don’t pass me by._ I am here, lady; please give me some soup.”

“Please, lady, pour some water on my arm, it is so dry and hot and the
wound hurts so.”

Without a moment’s relaxation the day passed in this kind of work.

In the afternoon the gunboats stopped firing, and the news came that
the Confederates were driven back.

Oh, how much that meant to us all; for through all that morning the
boats had their full head of steam on, so that if the army was driven
to the river, as many as possible could escape by that means.

Now and then I would help a surgeon who was dressing some of the worst
wounds. My clothing was wet and muddy to the knees, and covered with
blood, but I did not see it. I had not eaten a mouthful of food since
the night before, but I did not know it. I was entirely unconscious of
weariness and human needs.

It was about ten o’clock at night when some one asked,--

“Did you have supper?” This little question called me to the
consciousness of my condition.

“No,” I answered; “I have not had a mouthful to eat since yesterday
evening.”

A surgeon operating near by looked at me earnestly, and then said,
with the voice of authority,--

“Madam, stop work immediately. We will have you on our hands next.”

I was cutting a fragment of a blue blouse away from the arm of a
wounded young soldier. I continued my work till the bits of the blouse
were gotten out, as far as I could see, then laid on a wet compress.

“Oh! thank you,” he said, with grateful tears in his eyes.

I went back to the cabin of the hospital boat and had my supper. After
changing my clothes I sat down on a divan, feeling almost too weak
and exhausted to stir. A chaplain came on the boat, inquiring for me.
When he met me he seized my hand and began to bellow. I have never
heard anything like it. When I saw him, I knew that he was crazy. The
officers of the boat ran back to see what was the matter, and somehow
the surgeon in charge managed to get him into a stateroom and lock him
in, and place guards at the door, and the next day he was sent up with
the other patients to St. Louis on that boat.

Early the next morning I was transferred with the little baggage I had
to another boat set aside for hospital workers. My fine dress, which I
had worn for the first time the day before, was wet and muddy, and I
pitched it into the river.

Dr. Grinstead, now living in Washington City, was placed in charge of
the boat.

The Confederates had retreated toward Corinth, Miss., but there was
still firing in the distance. Early in the day I went up the steep bank
and out on the battle-field.

The wounded had been gathered up as far as I could see, but many of the
dead were still lying where they fell.

Not far from the landing there were some tents. In one of these tents
a son of Sam Houston, of Texas, lay on the ground with others, the
gray and the blue lying together. Young Houston was severely wounded
in the thigh. I talked with him kindly of his grand, loyal father, and
ministered to him as best I could. I saw him many times afterwards,
the last time a prisoner at Camp Douglass, near Chicago. If this by
any possibility passes under his notice, and he has not forgotten my
treatment of him when he was a wounded prisoner, I will be glad to hear
from him. I went toward a house on the right, but before I reached it I
saw two men coming, carrying a wounded soldier.

They had made a seat by clasping their hands, and his arms were thrown
about their necks. I went forward to meet them.

“Oh, set me down by that tree! I can go no farther,” he cried.

They carried him as tenderly as they could, and placed him between the
great roots of a very large tree. His breast was bare, and the blood
was slowly oozing out of a wound in his lungs.

“I am dying,” he said, “can’t somebody pray?” Both men were weeping.
If he was not a brother, he was a friend; I answered promptly, “I can
pray.” I knelt there on the damp ground, and taking one of his hands
in my own, I asked in simple words the heavenly Father to forgive
and bless. He responded to each petition. I kept on praying till he
said, “The way is light now, I do not fear.” There was a little gasp,
a shiver, and all was still. As I knelt there I closed his eyes and
said,--

“He is dead.”

“Yes,” they answered with a sob.

“He is dead, and this is all we can do. We will report the case, and
have the grave marked.” And we turned away and left him there. An hour
afterwards I returned that way. It was a most impressive sight to see a
dead man sitting there so calmly and peacefully, with eyes closed, dead
and cold. When I passed that way again, they had taken him away.

The country can never pay those who went out and heroically defended
the flag. Such scenes as these bring gray hairs before their time to
those who looked on. What must it have been to those in the midst of
the fight?




JOHNNIE CLEM.

THE DRUMMER BOY OF SHILOH AND THE BOY HERO OF CHICKAMAUGA, CHATTANOOGA.


Johnnie Clem, who lived at Newark, Ohio, was perhaps the youngest and
smallest recruit in the Union Army. The army historian, Lossing, says
that he was probably the youngest person who ever bore arms in battle.

He was born at Newark, Ohio, Aug. 13, 1851, and his full name was John
Winton Clem. He was of German-French descent, and the family spell the
name Klem, and not Clem. His sister Lizzie, who is now Mrs. Adams, and
lives on the Granville road near Newark, gives the following statement
to a visitor:--

It being Sunday, May 24, 1861, and the rebellion in progress, Johnnie
said at dinner table,--

“Father, I’d like mighty well to be a drummer boy. Can’t I go into the
Union army?”

“Tut! my boy, what nonsense! You are not ten years old,” was the
father’s reply; and he thought no more about it. When he disappeared,
he had no thought that he had gone into the service. That afternoon
Johnnie took charge of his sister Lizzie, seven years old, and
his little brother Lewis, five years old, and took them to the
Sunday-school room, and left them there.

As Johnnie did not return, the father and step-mother were greatly
distressed, fearing he had gone to the canal and gone in for a swim,
for he was an expert swimmer, and had been drowned. They searched far
and near to find him, and had the water drawn from the head of the
canal that they might find his body, but all in vain. Several weeks
past before they heard from him, and then they got word through a woman
living at Mount Vernon, who had been a neighbor to them at Newark, that
Johnnie had been there, and that she had sent him home in care of the
conductor.

It seems that Johnnie moved on the sympathies of the conductor, who
took him on to Columbus, where he joined the Twenty-fourth Ohio
Regiment; but ascertaining that an uncle was in that regiment, he left
it and joined the Twenty-second Michigan.

He was an expert drummer; and being a bright, cheerful little fellow,
he soon won his way into the confidence and affection of officers and
men.

He was in many battles; at Shiloh, Perryville, Murfreesboro,
Chattanooga, Chickamauga, Nashville, and Kenesaw, and in other
engagements in which the Army of the Cumberland took part.

When he entered the army, being too young to be mustered in, he went
with the regiment, the Twenty-second Michigan, as a volunteer, until
the battle of Shiloh.

When he was beating the long roll at the battle of Shiloh, a piece of
shell struck his drum and sent it flying in fragments. He was after
that called “Johnnie Shiloh.”

He was afterwards mustered in, and served also as a marker, and with
his little musket so served on the battle-field of Chattanooga. At
the close of that bloody day, the brigade in which he was, being
partly surrounded by rebels, was retreating, when he, being unable
to fall back as fast as the rest of the line, was singled out by a
rebel colonel who rode up to him with the summons, “Scoundrel, halt!
Surrender, you ---- little Yankee!”

Johnnie halted, and brought his gun into position as though he was
about to surrender, thus throwing the colonel off his guard. In another
moment the gun was cocked, fired, and the colonel fell dead from his
horse.

His regiment was pursued, and a volley was fired at that moment, and
Johnnie fell as though he had been killed, and lay there on the field
until it was dark enough for him to slip away unnoticed. At Chickamauga
he was struck with a fragment of a shell in the hip. He was taken
prisoner with others while detailed to bring up a supply train from
Bridgeport, Ala.

He fared hard as a prisoner. His sister, Mrs. Adams, says, “The rebels
stripped him of everything--his clothes, his shoes, his little gun--an
ordinary musket, I suppose, cut short--and his little cap. He said he
did not care about anything but his cap; he did want to save that,
and it hurt him sorely to part with it, for it had three bullet holes
through it.” When exchanged he was given a furlough and sent home for a
week. He was weak and emaciated from starvation, and his clothes were a
bundle of rags. He had been absent about two years in the army, and was
at that time in his twelfth year.

I did not meet him at Shiloh, but became acquainted with him at
Chattanooga, when he was in the hospital there, and saw him frequently
when he was on General Thomas’s staff.

He was a fair and beautiful child then, about twelve years old, but
very small of his age. He was at that time only about thirty inches
high and weighed about sixty pounds.

At Atlanta, while in the act of delivering a despatch from General
Thomas to General Logan, a ball struck the head of his pony obliquely,
killing him, and wounding his little rider in the right ear.

For his heroic conduct, he was made a sergeant, and his name placed on
the Roll of Honor, and he was attached to Headquarters of the Army of
the Cumberland.

Shortly afterwards he received from Nettie M. Chase, the daughter of
Chief Justice Chase, a silver medal inscribed:--

            SERGEANT JOHNNIE CLEM,
  TWENTY-SECOND MICHIGAN VOLUNTEER INFANTRY,
                FROM N. M. C.

which he worthily wears as a badge of honor on his left breast with
other medals.

When the war was over, General Thomas advised him to study and make
a man of himself. He studied at West Point, but on account of his
size he could not enter as a cadet. In 1890 he weighed one hundred
and five pounds and was only five feet high. His wife, Annita, the
daughter of General Wm. H. French, U.S.A., is also small and delicate,
weighing about seventy pounds. General Grant commissioned him as a
lieutenant. He is now captain of the twenty-fourth U.S. Infantry, and
is stationed at Columbus, Ohio, and holds the important office of depot
quartermaster and commissary.

He has one son living, who is very like him, only he will be larger.

From recent correspondence he seems to be the same kindly,
great-hearted Johnnie as when I first met him at Chattanooga, Tenn.




ARMY TRICKS.


There were many tricks played on the officers, just for the fun of the
thing, during the war, especially if the troops remained long at any
one camping-place.

In one of the many camps of the Union soldiers, an odd trick was
played off on the surgeon and chaplain of a regiment noted for its
merry-making.

The troops were camped by a small stream, over which was a narrow,
rickety bridge.

Just across from the camp was a log cabin, in which lived an old woman
alone.

The woman paid no attention to the soldiers, but went about her daily
duties as though unconscious of their presence.

One day some of the boys passed the cabin, and hurrying over the
rickety bridge, came running into the camp with the message, “The old
woman in the cabin is dying!” The chaplain and surgeon were notified.

“Chaplain, hurry over quick! The old woman is dying!”

The chaplain hurried over the rickety bridge as rapidly as possible;
the surgeon soon followed. As the chaplain came round to the open door
he saw at a glance that it was a trick, and he passed on around the
house, so as to allow the surgeon to come on and bear a full share of
the joke.

The woman _was dyeing_. She _was over a kettle of butternut juice
dyeing a lot of yarn_.

When the two came back over the bridge the whole camp was in a roar of
laughter over the joke.

But what could be done? The men had reported a truth--the woman _was_
dyeing; so there was no redress.




GENERAL GRANT’S KINDNESS.


One morning during the war, coming down on the packet boat that plied
between Cairo, Ill., and Columbus, Ky., I noticed a woman weeping as
though her heart would break. Her calico dress and coarse blanket-shawl
betokened abject poverty, and her face was hidden; and she sobbed out
her anguish in a coarse bandanna handkerchief.

Laying my hand gently on her shoulder, I said,--

“My dear woman, what is the matter?”

“It’s my boy I’m crying about; he’s awful sick down in Tennessee, and
he has writ for me to come down an’ nus him up, but the men as keeps
the passes at Cairo says I can’t go.

“They say there’s plenty to take care uv my boy, and maybe there is;
but I reckon that his muther what took care uv him when he was a baby
could do it better nor any of them.

“My boy wus a very smart boy. You never seen a smarter boy nor a better
boy than mine wuz. Well, if they won’t let me go down on the railroad
I reckon I can walk. My boy’s sick an’ I’m bound to go. They tried to
skeer me by tellin’ me the guards would arrest me if I tried to get
through the lines. But I can dodge the guards, an’ creep under the
lines. Anyway, I s’pose them guards ar’ human cre’turs, an’ if I tell
’em my boy is a solger, an’ awful sick, an’ wants his mother to come
down an’ nus him, they’ll let me go through.”

“Have you his letter with you?”

“Yes, I have.”

And out of the depth of a capacious pocket she drew forth a package,
and carefully unrolling it, she handed me a letter. It was short, but
full of tender pathos. The boy was sick and homesick, and wanted his
mother. Among other things, he said:--

“You could nus me better than the boys. I hain’t got no apertite and
can’t eat nothin’; the boys hain’t much on cookin’, but you could cook
something that I could eat, and maybe I’d get well.”

Satisfied that she was a true woman, and not a spy, I said:--

“General Grant, the highest officer in the army, is on this boat. He
can give you a pass; he was sitting here by this table a few minutes
ago; as he has left his paper and writing material there, he will
no doubt return in a few minutes. Go to him and show him your boy’s
letter, and ask him for a pass. He will give it to you.”

She was almost dismayed at the thought of speaking to such a great man.
When the General came in and took a seat at the table, I whispered to
her,--

“Now go,--don’t be afraid.”

The meeting of the two was a picture for an artist.

With sun-bonnet pushed back, and her coarse shawl drawn closely about
her, she timidly approached him, holding out the letter.

General Grant looked up kindly.

“Are you Gineral Grant?” she questioned.

“Yes.”

“Well, my boy’s awful sick down in Tennessee, an’ he’s writ me this
letter to cum an’ nus him up; but them men at Cairo what gives passes
said I might be a spy, and they wouldn’t give me a pass.

“But, Gineral, I hain’t no spy; I’m a good Union woman as ever lived;
and there’s a lady here as allowed that if I’d ask you maybe you’d give
me a pass.”

In the meantime, General Grant had looked over the letter and
scrutinized the woman, and handing the letter back to her, he said,
“Yes, I’ll give you a pass; what is your name?”

The woman gave her name; but she was so delighted that she talked all
the while he was writing the pass:--

“It’s awful unhandy for me to leave home now, cos I hain’t nobody
to take care of nothing. Bill Spence’s wife, she agreed to milk the
cow, but I had a beautiful pig, and I had to turn that out to root for
itself, and I’m awful feared that it will get lost while I’m gone. But
I told Mis’ Spence that I’d ruther risk the pig than to risk my boy,
for he’s an awful good boy, Gineral.”

“This pass will take you down and bring you back,” said General Grant,
handing her the precious document.

“How much do you s’pose it’ll cost me to go down?”

“It will cost you nothing, madam; the pass will take you free.”

“Don’t they charge nuthen on them roads?”

“They will not charge you. A mother who has given her son to the
government, the government can afford to carry free.”

Just then I got her attention and beckoned her away.

“I’m very much obliged to you, Gineral,” she said, and made an
old-fashioned courtesy.

Years afterward, while he was an occupant of the White House, and I
was there on a friendly visit, I reminded him of the circumstance,
which he had almost forgotten, and expressed the hope that the boy had
recovered, and that she had found her pig on her return. He smiled, and
said,--

“I always let the mothers pass if their boys were sick, and they
seemed to be good loyal women.”

I had noticed that General Grant did not judge by appearance or dress.
Often the lady in her silks was turned back, while a woman arrayed in
calico would go through the lines.




ARMY LIFE AT HELENA, ARKANSAS.


Helena, Arkansas, was an important military station in 1862-63. In
December, 1862, General Sherman, with his great fleet of boats and an
army of twenty or thirty thousand men, moved from that point down the
Mississippi River upon Vicksburg. There was nothing in the place of
itself that made it a desirable camping-ground for troops, other than
that it was an advance station far down into the enemy’s country, and
commanded considerable important territory. The soldiers called it a
“God-forsaken place.”

It was named after the daughter of the founder of the town, Helena;
but the soldiers suggested that the name ought to be spelled with one
syllable and two l’s.

Along the river front the land was very low and subject to overflows,
but was protected by a high embankment, which effectually shut out
the flood tides of the Mississippi River. Just back of the town was a
great green cypress swamp, that was crossed by a corduroy road--a road
made of large round logs fastened together at each end. Back of the
swamp rose high bluffs of yellow clay. They were unsightly and very
precipitous; in most places perpendicular. Their uneven sides were
seamed and wrinkled by the floods and storms of ages, and looked like a
line of forts.

It is easy to imagine the discomfort of such a camping place. During
the winter and spring the streets of the town were miry and almost
impassable.

In December, 1862, I reached Helena with a heavy lot of hospital
supplies. I sent a message to my friend, General Cyrus Bussey, who
was Assistant-Secretary of the Interior during President Harrison’s
administration, but who was then in command, requesting an ambulance,
that I might visit the several hospitals. He sent me a note, saying
that it would be impossible to get about in an ambulance, but that if I
wished he would send me an army wagon. Of course I accepted the offer.
A big wagon, with four good strong mules attached, was sent me. A
camp-chair was put in for my use; and Chaplain P. P. Ingalls offered to
accompany me, and took a seat with the driver on a board which had been
placed across the wagon bed. We started down the principal street of
the town, towards the steamboat-landing; but we had not gone far till
the team began to mire. The mules made a desperate struggle to get out,
and the driver tried to turn them towards the sidewalk; but the more
they struggled the deeper they sank into the black mire of the street.
The mules were in up to their sides, and the wagon had sunk down almost
to the bed.

Immediately a crowd of soldiers gathered on the board sidewalk. They
had been through many a miry place, and knew just what to do. Boards
from the near fence and rails were brought, and soon the space was
bridged between the struggling mules and the board sidewalk. The mules
were soon detached from the wagon, poles and rails were used to pry
them out, and ropes were put about them, and they were pulled by main
force to the sidewalk.

As the boards on which the men stood sank down in the mud, other boards
were brought and laid on top of them, and many willing hands made the
work of rescue possible. The last mule to be rescued was up to his
sides in the mire.

It seemed almost impossible to get a rail down under him, or to get
ropes about him, so as to help him; but at last, covered with black mud
and almost exhausted, he stood on the board sidewalk. Chaplain Ingalls
and myself were then rescued, the wagon was abandoned, and a board put
up, “NO BOTTOM,” to warn others.




A TERRIBLE STORM AT CHATTANOOGA.

HOW THE MEN IN THE HOSPITAL TENTS WERE SAVED FROM FREEZING.


On the night of Dec. 31, 1863, a fearful storm swept over the Southern
States, extending from the Mississippi River to the Atlantic Coast.
I was at Chattanooga at the time. The tempest came down upon us like
an Arctic hurricane. It beat and tore around the cliffs of Lookout
Mountain and down its gorges, levelling trees, and freezing the
life-currents in every unprotected living thing. Many of the guards on
duty in the army that night froze to death. General Russell A. Alger,
who was in front of the enemy in the Eastern Army that night, tells
of his ride along the picket-line. As the position of his forces was
a dangerous one, he desired to assure himself that the guards were at
their posts of duty.

At one point, where the lines of the two armies came close together,
and the danger was especially great, a trusty soldier had been posted.
As General Alger approached that point, he was surprised at not being
halted, and he felt sure that the guard was asleep.

“Why do you not challenge me, sir?” he demanded. There was no response.
Taking the man by the shoulder, General Alger was shocked to find him
dead. Standing against a tree, facing the enemy, that terrible night,
with eyes and ears on the strain, intent on doing his duty well, he had
frozen to death.

At Chattanooga there was great suffering from scarcity of food, and
clothing, and lack of proper protection. The railroad had been repaired
to Bridgeport only; and it was necessary to haul all the supplies
of that great army from Bridgeport to Chattanooga, a distance of
twenty-eight miles, and over a rough, stony mountain road. The army
had marched over this road to Mission Ridge and Chickamauga, and their
shoes had been cut to pieces on the sharp rocks. Many of the men were
almost barefooted. They were two hundred and thirty-six miles inland
from their base of supplies. Every bridge had been destroyed, and every
foot of the long line of railroad had to be guarded.

Those of us who ventured to travel over that dangerous route had to
take the chances, both of obstructions on the track, and volleys
of musketry from ambuscades. When the storm fell upon the army at
Chattanooga the troops lacked both food and clothing.

At the foot of Lookout Mountain, there was a large “field hospital,” at
which were quartered the men who were most severely wounded and sick.
The men were sheltered by large tents, and lay on cots. There were no
floors in these tents, and no arrangements for heating them.

Mrs. Jeremiah Porter of Chicago, a dear little saint, who is now in
heaven, had gone to Chattanooga with me; and we were together at the
rooms of the Christian Commission when the storm burst upon the place
in its terrible fury. Amid the raging of the tempest, which made every
timber in the old frame building creak, and threatened to tear away
the roof that covered us, our first thought was of the men in the
field hospital, who were exposed to its fury. Night, as it was, it was
decided that we should go to their relief. While the delegates were
getting out the horses and ambulances, everything that would be likely
to add to the comfort of the patients was collected from the stores on
hand. It was about daybreak when we started.

The way was lined with dead mules and horses frozen to death.
Half-starved and unsheltered they could not live in such a storm. The
muddy roads were now frozen. The wind was in our faces, and the two
miles we had to travel seemed a long journey.

When we reached the hospital our worst fears were realized. Many of the
tents had been blown down upon the faces of the helpless men. Against
the fierce northern blasts, which threatened to tear the tents into
tatters, the attendants were striving to right them. But the force was
small compared to the work which needed to be done. To leeward of the
camp, three great log fires were blazing and crackling furiously.

Mother Bickerdyke, a grand old army nurse, who did heroic service in
the hospitals from the beginning until the close of the war, was there,
and giving directions with the clearness and force of a sea-captain in
a storm. Orders were imposed on all of us before we were out of the
ambulance. “Come on, Lawrence, with your men, and help get up these
tents. Mrs. Wittenmyer, you and Mrs. Porter get sticks and pry out
rocks, and heat them here in these fires and put them about the men to
keep them from freezing.”

We all went to work at once. No one stood upon the order of his going.
With such sticks as we could pick up it was hard to pry out the rocks,
but we were willing and we succeeded. One delegate had brought a lot
of reading-matter with him; and we utilized them as wrappers for the
hot rocks, which we carried in our arms to the cots, creeping under
the flapping canvas when the tents were down, and putting them around
the men the best we could, and speaking at the time words of cheer
which they so much needed. I thank God that because of the heroic
and timely efforts which were made, not one man froze to death in
the tents that day. The great log fires, we learned later, had been
built from a part of a fort surrendered by the Confederates. Mother
Bickerdyke, not finding suitable wood for fires which could withstand a
tempest, suggested to the surgeon, that such timbers as they could get
out of the two forts be used for that purpose. But as the forts were
government property, the surgeon refused to touch them without an order.

Military headquarters were two miles away, and the tempest was raging.
Mother Bickerdyke rose to the emergency as usual. “Come on, boys,” said
she; “we’ll soon have the timbers out of the old fort. What possible
use can Uncle Sam put them to?”

The surgeon warned her that it would be his duty to report the matter
to the proper authorities. “That’s all right, doctor; but in the
meantime we’ll have the fires going.” Of course nothing was ever done
about it. We toiled all day. As the tents were raised we carried great
pans and kettles full of live coals into the tents, and emptied them
on the ground to temper the keen air, which seemed to pierce to the
marrow. I had brought up the river, with great difficulty, a special
store of supplies, transporting them in a small boat, through the
special kindness of General John A. Logan, who had detailed the boat
for that purpose. Among the supplies was the largest lot of good
woollen home-knit socks I had ever seen together. Many sacks of them
had been pitched into the ambulance that morning; and as we went
through the tents we examined the feet of the men to see if they were
frozen. We put socks on the feet that were bare, and kept the hot
bowlders moving back and forth to aid all. Many of the men had on good
socks which had been sent to them by mail; but the feet of many were
bare. I shall never forget the stone-bruised feet on which we put warm
woollen socks that day.

At last the work was well-nigh done. The wind had abated, the tents
were up, and our supplies were nearly all distributed. We had reached
the last tent, and the last two men in the tent. I turned to the last
sack to draw out two pairs of stockings for the two men before us, but
there was only one pair in the sack. “O Mrs. Porter, what shall I do?
There are two men, and only one pair of socks!” I exclaimed in despair.

To my surprise the men began to laugh; and one of them said, “There is
no great loss without some small profit, Jim.” And they laughed again
heartily. At last one of them explained. “You see, miss, we’ve each of
us lost a leg, and one pair will do us both.” And this was true; they
had been brought into the tent for the amputation, and laid side by
side. We were both deeply impressed. I had not counted the feet or the
socks, but He who counts the hairs of our heads had counted both. Mrs.
Porter and I divided the one pair between us, and each put a sock on
the one foot. Tears of sympathy blinded our eyes as we remembered that
henceforth these two heroes must walk lame through life.

It was wonderful with what heroism these men could bear their
sufferings and losses. They were full of hope, and grateful for every
little kindness. They literally overwhelmed me with thanks. But it was
left for an Irishman to express his thanks for timely help in the most
original manner. He said in the most impassioned tones, his face all
aglow,--

“And sure it’s an angel ye are, and may ye be in heaven three weeks
before the devil finds out ye’re dead.”




THE WONDERFUL POTATO-PATCH.


In the spring of 1862 potatoes were very scarce and dear.

The women of Muscatine, Iowa, who were earnest workers in the Soldiers’
Aid Society of that town, were anxious to secure potatoes to send to
the army. They decided to canvass the town and the region round about
for that purpose.

But the first grocery they entered the proprietor said, “No, I have no
potatoes to spare; but I have a field about a mile out of town that you
may have the use of, if you wish to raise potatoes.”

The proposition was accepted gladly; and they at once began to solicit
potatoes for planting.

At the appointed day for planting, the loyal old men who had not
gone to the front, and the women and children, rallied for the work.
Wagons were in readiness to carry out the ploughs, harrows, hoes, and
potatoes. The men ploughed and harrowed and furrowed the ground, the
women and children followed, dropping and covering the potatoes, and
the field in due time was planted.

When the time came to cultivate the potatoes, a “potato picnic” was
announced; and when the day arrived, wagons were in readiness to take
all who were willing to work to the field. A picnic dinner was served,
and although the work was hard, these hours of toil were enlivened with
laughter and song and wit and wisdom; and the weeds were destroyed, and
the potatoes cultivated. And so it was each time when the cultivation
of the field was needed.

Happily the Colorado beetle, known as the potato bug, had not been
heard of as yet.

But there came a time of drought and great anxiety, for men, and women
too, for women toiled in the fields in those heroic days. They watched
the clouds with sinking hearts, as they sailed carelessly by, giving
never a drop of rain to revive vegetation and moisten the parched earth.

Every one felt as much interest in the potato-field the women had
planted as though it had been their own.

There are, perhaps, a score or more of men and women still living in
that loyal town, who will remember that “Sanitary Potato-Patch;” and
the remarkable fact, that one day a cloud sailed over it and drenched
the field with rain, scattering only a few sprinkles over the fields
adjoining.

The yield of that potato-field was immense; and the entire crop was
in time shipped to me at St. Louis, and distributed in camps and
hospitals.

I do not now remember how many bushels they raised on that patch of
ground, but I distinctly remember that they sent me by one shipment
fifteen hundred bushels of potatoes.

Never were potatoes more needed, or more acceptable to men suffering
from that army scourge, “scurvy,” than were those fifteen hundred
bushels, distributed to Iowa soldiers and to all in the general
hospitals. To me the supply seemed inexhaustible.

One of the first stops made by the steamer sent down with them was at
Island No. 10, above Memphis, Tenn., where one hundred bushels were put
off, with the injunction that they must be divided equally among the
men and officers of an Iowa regiment stationed there.

There were over one thousand men in all.

On my return trip the steamer stopped again at Island No. 10. My feet
had scarcely touched the shore till I was surrounded by soldiers, who
reported that the officers had eaten up most of the potatoes, and that
they had been given only about three messes.

I was indignant, and went directly to the colonel’s headquarters with
the complaint. He was greatly surprised, and sent for the quartermaster
and other officials, who listened to the complaints very serenely. When
they had heard all I had to say the quartermaster said,--

“You only gave us one hundred bushels of potatoes; how long did you
think they would last?”

“About a month I thought.”

“We have ten companies of one hundred men each. Every company got ten
bushels. That divided among one hundred men would only give them about
two messes apiece.”

“That is so,” I confessed with some confusion.

“I see,” he continued, “that you are not accustomed to feeding armies.”

“If that is the way they eat, I don’t want the task of feeding them. I
accept your explanation, and beg you to excuse my ignorance in these
matters.”

And so we parted. I had a few minutes later, as the boys gathered
about me at the landing, the privilege of explaining why they did not
get more than two or three messes of potatoes,--that there were too
many of them. That if there had been ten men and one hundred bushels
of potatoes, instead of one thousand men and one hundred bushels of
potatoes, they would have fared better.




SAVED BY LEMONADE.


The many-colored signal lights of the fleet of steamers at Milliken’s
Bend, and the bright camp-fires on the land, that glowed with such
unwonted splendor in the gloaming, soon all faded out of sight as our
boat steamed away toward St. Louis; and soon the black curtain of night
shut us in with its thick heavy folds like a funeral pall, and our
fight with disease and death began in earnest.

Never before in the history of wars, so full of untold agonies, did
the timbers of a steamer bear up such a burden of pain, despair, and
death, as did the _City of Memphis_ as she steamed away from Sherman’s
army. Wherever there was room for a sick or wounded soldier, on the
cabin floor without mattress or pillow, in the staterooms, under the
stateroom berths, out on the guards, on the top, or hurricane deck, on
the lower deck, every space was filled with sore, weary, aching human
bodies, mangled or fever-smitten. Of the seven hundred and fifty sick
and wounded on board, about twenty-five were delirious; and their
pitiful cries mingled with the whirr of the wheels, and the splash of
the waters, as the monster boat, with its heart of fire and its breath
of steam, pulled heavily against the mighty tides of the Mississippi
River, were heart-breaking. No one who was on that boat can ever forget
that first night out. Nor can I be charged with over-drawing the
picture. No pencil can paint it black enough.

Nothing has ever haunted my waking and sleeping dreams, not even the
ghastly scenes of the battle-field, as the memory of the concentrated
horrors of that journey. The groans and cries of the wounded and dying
still ring through my soul; and from feelings of compassion I draw the
curtain over the darkest scenes, that even at this distance make me
shudder, and give to my readers only the more pleasant incidents of the
journey, which was in truth a funeral march.

One man lying on the floor of the ladies’ cabin on his blanket, with
his fever-racked head on his knapsack, gave me such an appealing look
that I went to him.

“What can I do for you?” I inquired.

“You can write to my wife if you get through alive, and tell her I died
on the _City of Memphis_.”

“While there is life there is hope. You are not dead yet, and may not
die.”

“Oh, yes, I will! there is no chance for me. Now take down her name,”
and he gave me the name and address of his wife.

“Now I must do something to help you,” I said. “Could you drink a cup
of tea?”

“No, nothing--it’s too late.”

“Could you drink a glass of lemonade?”

How his face brightened! “Where could you get it?” he asked eagerly.

“Make it. I have lemons and sugar, and there is a whole river full of
water at hand.”

The poor man cried with joy; and others wept, too, as they drank the
refreshing beverage, for, providentially, I had a heavy lot of lemons
with me.

The patient began to mend at once, and by the time we reached Cairo was
able to sit up.

Years afterwards I was on a Mississippi River steamer bound for St.
Louis, when I noticed a lady and gentleman regarding me with some
interest, and heard the gentleman say,--

“I am sure it is she.”

The lady came directly to me, with the question,--

“Did you come up the Mississippi River on the _City of Memphis_ with
the wounded after Sherman’s defeat?”

“Yes, I did.”

“It’s she! It’s she!” the lady exclaimed joyfully, much to the
amusement of some of the passengers who had not heard the question.

The gentleman joined us, and made himself known as the man who started
the lemonade treat on that doleful night. “That saved my life,” he said
reverently.

“I want you to know,” said his wife, with tears on her face, “that we
have never for a day forgotten you, though we did not know your name.
We prayed for you as the unknown lady; and the children were taught to
end their evening prayer with, ‘and God bless the unknown lady that
saved papa’s life.’”

It was a very happy and pleasant meeting, although purely accidental.




NOT TIME TO SEND FOR THE COLONEL.


Clinton B. Fisk was chosen colonel of a regiment made up largely
of ministers and religious men. The morality of the regiment was a
matter of favorable comment, not only in the camp where they were
drilled before leaving the State, but also as they advanced down the
Mississippi River. Some one suggested that Colonel Fisk should do the
swearing of the regiment, as he was “as religious as a preacher.”

The colonel, who was not to be nonplussed by such a proposition,
readily accepted the duty, the men all assenting.

“Soldiers,” he said, with great gravity, “if there is any necessary
swearing to be done in this regiment, call on your colonel.”

Weeks passed, during which not an oath was heard in camp. The first
hard camping-place was at Helena, Ark. The regiment pitched their tents
on the bluff back of the town, on yellow clay, which after a rain
became like putty. It was more than a mile to the steamboat-landing;
and all the supplies had to be hauled through the miry streets of the
town and over the corduroy road,--a road made of logs firmly fastened
together,--and then up a long, steep hill, where the mud-like yellow
putty gathered upon the wheels and upon the feet of men and beasts.

Colonel Fisk sat in his tent one day attending to official business,
when he heard one of his men, a teamster, swearing like a Hessian. He
recognized his voice, and determined to reprove the man at the first
opportunity. He had not long to wait. “John,” he called, “come here.”
John responded with a military salute, and stood before his colonel
unflinchingly.

“John, did I not hear some one swearing dreadfully down the hill a
little while ago?”

“Yes, Colonel, that was me.”

“You, John? I am surprised. Don’t you remember that I was to do the
swearing for this regiment?”

“Yes, Colonel, I know; but, you see, I was coming up the hill with a
big load, and the breeching broke. The swearing had to be done right
away, and you weren’t there to do it.” And the teamster made the
military salute and retired.

Many of the other privates were so full of wit that it was almost
impossible for the officers to reprove them. General Fisk, years
afterward, used to say laughingly, that it was little worth while to
try to argue a question with John, his teamster, as he always got the
best of the argument.




A VISIT TO PARSON BROWNLOW.


The Confederates had been driven back from Chattanooga and Knoxville,
and the lines of railroad travel had been re-established. I had
occasion at that time to go to Knoxville. The journey was a dangerous
one; but the mission was important, and I took the chances. I was
delighted to learn, after reaching Knoxville, that Parson Brownlow, the
hero of East Tennessee, was at home. It was afterward arranged that I
should meet him at his own house.

He dwelt in an unpretentious, two-story frame structure, having a
little portico in front. Firmly attached to the little portico was a
tall flagstaff, from which floated a large Union flag. This flag had
been put up at the beginning of the war, and had never been hauled
down. Parson Brownlow was tall, lithe, and sinewy in form. His hair
was black and abundant. He was a quiet talker while conversing on
ordinary subjects; but when the war, the causes which led to it, the
plotting and scheming by which the loyal sentiment of East Tennessee
was silenced, was the theme, his eyes flashed fire, his wit, sarcasm,
and denunciation flowed in electric currents. His sentences were short,
terse, and emphatic. One could better understand, looking into his
face when he straightened himself up to his full height and poured out
his torrent of accusations, why men whom he charged with treason and
falsehood, and arraigned before God and men, should fall back in fear
and shame.

He pointed out to me the little prison, with its iron-barred windows,
in which he was for a time confined as a prisoner. The jail stood
on the bank of the River Holstein, and he was put into a cell which
overlooked the river and forest beyond. For a time his enemies had
possession of the town, and he was placed where he could see nothing
that was going on, and it was well. Many of his neighbors who had
assumed to be loyal brought out Confederate flags, which they had kept
concealed in flour-barrels, and flung them to the breeze. But there was
one Union flag which did not come down, and that was the broad standard
which floated over the little portico of Parson Brownlow’s house.

Mrs. Brownlow, a quiet, lovely little woman, added a word in
explanation now and then; but when her boys were spoken of, she sighed
heavily as though her heartstrings would snap asunder. And yet she had,
in defence of the flag, shown uncommon courage. There were only two
children at home; one a young lady, the other a girl of about ten or
twelve years. We all stood out on the little portico, and Miss Brownlow
described to me her heroic defence of the flag which was waving above
us. She was a beautiful and stately woman; and as she stood there that
day describing the scene, when with drawn pistol she challenged the men
sent to take down that flag, she was the most perfect personification
of the Goddess of Liberty I ever saw. As her eyes flashed fire, and her
words rang out clear, full, and emphatic, we could well understand why
the men retired.

The flag was watched and defended until a Union force came to their
relief. The little force advanced carefully, until the head of the
column reached the crest of the hill which environs the place.
Looking out over the town, which was quietly sleeping in the gray
of the morning, they saw among the Confederate flags the Stars and
Stripes waving from one pole. It was like an inspiration. They made
an impetuous charge, and captured the town. The flag over Parson
Brownlow’s house never came down.

The influence of Parson Brownlow on Tennessee, and especially East
Tennessee, still lives, and will live for ages. He was a man of great
soul, of intense convictions, and of courage equal to his convictions.
If he had been a coward, his blood would have watered the soil of
Tennessee. But his courage, his wonderful mastery of the English
language, and the fearful majesty of his presence, cowed his enemies;
and those who had planned to take his life were glad to send him away
out of their presence.

My visit to Parson Brownlow, his burning words, and the story of the
flag, can never be forgotten. He was by far the ablest man Tennessee
has ever produced.




A RICH REWARD FOR SERVICES.

SAVING THE LIFE OF A BROTHER.


I went out to Sedalia, which was in the heart of the State of Missouri,
with supplies.

It was a crisp winter morning in January when the train reached the
place. I went directly to a large hospital near the railroad station.
Visitors were not received at that hour; but a pass from Mr. Stanton,
Secretary of War, unbarred the door which opened from the vestibule
into a large, long room filled with cots. On each cot lay a sick or
wounded soldier.

Breakfast was being served by the attendants. Glancing down the room, I
saw one of my own brothers, a lad of sixteen, who, fired with the war
spirit, had gained consent to go. I had thought that he was a hundred
miles or more away. There was a look of utter disgust on his face as he
rejected the breakfast and waved the attendant away.

“If you can’t eat this you’ll have to do without; there is nothing
else,” was the attendant’s discouraging response. On a dingy-looking
wooden tray was a tin cup full of black, strong coffee; beside it was
a leaden-looking tin platter, on which was a piece of fried fat bacon,
swimming in its own grease, and a slice of bread. Could anything be
more disgusting and injurious to fever-stricken and wounded patients?

And nearly every soldier in that hospital was prostrated by fever or
severe wounds; yet this was the daily diet, with little variation.
Typhoid fever and acute dysentery was the verdict of a conference of
physicians that consulted in regard to my brother.

There was little hope of his recovery. An old, experienced physician
said, “If he can have good care and nursing his recovery is possible,
but not probable.” And the sad news was telegraphed to the dear old
home. The surgeon removed him into a little inner room, and my fight
with death began in earnest.

Oh! those dreadful days and nights of watching; no joys of earth can
ever obliterate their memory.

The restless tossing of the fever-stricken ones in the adjoining room,
the groans of the wounded, the drip, drip, drip, of the leaking vessels
hung above the worst wounded ones to drop water on the bandages and
keep them cool and moist, put every nerve on the rack, and pulsated
through heart and brain till it seemed as though I should go wild. It
was an inside view of the hospitals that made me hate war as I had
never known how to hate it before.

The pitiful cry of helpless ones calling, “Nurse, nurse! water, water!”
and the weary, sleepy nurses making no response--sitting, perhaps, fast
asleep, yet willing to do their duty when I aroused them, still rings
in my ears.

The surgeon in charge and all the attendants were kind and respectful,
coming into our room on tiptoe lest their rude steps and ways might
jostle a soul, hanging by a thread, out of life. Each day a telegram
was sent to those who watched and prayed far away: “No better--sinking.”

But a new anxiety disturbed me. The acting medical director, who
visited the hospital each day, coming in reeling drunk on the second
day, ordered that I should only be admitted for an hour each day, in
the afternoon.

No one in the hospital was ready to enforce such a brutal order.

Immediately the chief officers at Sedalia and St. Louis were advised of
the state of affairs.

The next day, when the acting medical director came into the hospital,
he was too drunk to talk plainly, or to walk without staggering, and
yet his word was law. He was not too drunk to notice my presence when
he staggered into that little room, however. He said,--

“Madam, it’s against my rules to have any ladies in my hospitals, and
you must leave here.”

“The devotion of a sister is stronger than all hospital rules,” I
answered calmly.

“You can’t stay in this hospital. I’m boss here.” I made no answer.
One or the other of us must certainly leave that hospital. Letters and
telegrams poured in upon the chief officers at St. Louis, from all
the leading officers and surgeons in the army at Sedalia, and he was
relieved from duty before the rising of another sun. And as he was
only acting medical director, not yet having been mustered in, he was
dismissed from the service, and I never saw his face again.

There was general rejoicing throughout the hospital, the camp, and the
town, for the man had been a disgrace to the army. After this, there
were only disease and death to fight. The powers of human endurance are
wonderful. For seven days and nights I never closed my eyes to sleep,
only as I leaned my head down on the side of the cot on which the one
lay who was hovering between life and death.

My eldest brother, Dr. William H. Turner, who was a surgeon in the
Union army, came up on a leave; but as the forces were ordered on
the expedition against Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, he received a
telegram to join his command the very next day. He had little hope of
ever seeing his brother’s face again; but good nursing brought him,
and many others in that hospital, through to health again. He not only
recovered, but he returned to the army; and when his term for three
years had expired, he re-enlisted and served till the close of the war.

He is still living. He has a ranch and a placer gold mine, with first
water rights, near Helena, Mon., where he lives with his family.

In the corner near our little room lay a fair-faced boy of sixteen.
The surgeons had given him up to die. When we looked into each other’s
faces I asked the question, “Can I do anything for you?” The tears came
welling up into his great brown eyes; and after a moment’s struggle,
he burst into tears, sobbing like a child. I laid my face down on the
pillow and cried too. No one laughed and called him babyish. Poor
boy! sick and homesick, and needing so much care and love, and yet
getting so little; lingering on the borderland, with no hand to help,
and no voice to cheer him. No wonder he cried aloud; great stalwart
men, stricken down in the midst of the fight, wounded, sick, and sore,
understood it; and tears were on many a bronzed face as, taking his
thin hands in my own, I cried with him.

As soon as he could command himself he said, “If only I could go home,
mother could nurse me up in a little while.”

“You shall go home. I’ll get you a furlough as soon as you get well
enough,” I answered hopefully.

From that hour there was a marked improvement in that patient’s
symptoms, and many other overcharged hearts were relieved by this
outburst of feeling. In less than two weeks this boy, closely wrapped
in blankets, was helped to the train, for he was going home on a
furlough. Friends were to meet him at St. Louis, and accompany him to
his home and his mother in Denmark, Iowa.

And she did nurse him up; and he returned well and strong, to beat the
drum for the rallying of the serried ranks of men, who, with set faces
and glittering steel, marched to battle.

Never was a mother more grateful than that Iowa mother was for the
little kindnesses shown to her suffering boy. I afterwards met him in
the ranks; for he came down to the Sanitary boat to meet me. He was
well and strong, and very grateful for the little help I had rendered
him.




SAVED BY A BIRD.


The surgeon in one of the Nashville hospitals said, pointing to one
of his patients, “There is a young man slowly starving to death. His
fever is broken, and he might get well, but we cannot get him to eat
anything. If you can tempt him to eat he may recover.”

I went over and stood beside his cot. “I am glad to see you looking so
much better,” I said enthusiastically. He shook his head. “Oh, yes you
are; and now what can I bring you to eat? I’ll bring you something real
nice; what shall it be?”

“Nothing.” And he turned his face away in disgust.

“I’ll tell you what you can eat;” for I suddenly remembered that I
had seen a lot of birds hanging in a meat-shop as I came down to that
hospital; “you can eat a nice broiled bird.”

He looked up in surprise with a ghost of a smile on his face. “Maybe I
could.”

“Why, of course you could; and I will go right away and get one for
you.”

“It will be too much trouble.”

“No, it will not be a bit of trouble. You lie still and think what good
eating a bird is till it comes.”

I hurried away lest he should change his mind, bought some birds,
and took them to the Christian Commission Home, where there was an
excellent cook.

“Aunt Debby,” I said, as I marched into the kitchen with the birds, “I
want you to broil two of these birds the very best you can. A soldier’s
life depends upon them.”

“Laws, missus! You ’most scare me to death talking dat way. I’ze weak
as a rag, and ken do nuthen.”

“But you’ll do it right, and then the soldier will get well. I’ll help
you.”

In a very short time two birds nicely broiled, and dressed with a
little fresh butter and a pinch of salt and pepper, lay in the bottom
of a hot covered dish. A card with the name of the hospital, the name
of the soldier, and the number of his cot, was attached to the basket;
and a half-grown colored boy in service at the house was intrusted with
it, and bore it away in haste.

“Take notice, Ben, what he does and says, so you can tell us when you
come back,” was my last injunction.

In due time Ben came back, laughing. “Did he eat them?” I questioned
eagerly.

“O missus, you o’ter ’a’ seen ’im. I sot don the basket and tooked off
de cover and held the birds up close tu ’im; an’ my, but it did smell
good! He jus’ gim it one look, den he grab one an’ begun to eat. But
I wus a-holden de dish dar, an’ he seed t’other bird, and he grabbed
dat, an’ he dove his han’ dow under ’is piller an’ brung out an ole
newspaper, and he wrapped up t’other bird and chucked it down under his
piller, and den he went on eaten as fast as he could. Oh, golly, but
wusent he hungry!” And Ben doubled himself up and laughed as only a
colored boy can laugh.

The next day I was called away to Chattanooga, and so I left all
my work in other hands. While in Chattanooga, General Hood marched
northward and broke the lines of communication between Nashville and
Chattanooga, and I was detained there several weeks. The very day after
my return I was on the streets of Nashville, and a soldier met me with
great cordiality.

“I don’t believe you know me,” he said.

“No, I don’t remember to have ever met you before,” I replied.

“I’m the man you sent the birds to.”

“I am glad to see you. How is it that you are up and out so soon?”

“Well, you see, there wasn’t anything the matter with me, but I did not
know it. I thought I was going to die, but the birds did the business.
I never did taste anything quite so nice as they were, and I have been
eating ever since, anything I could lay my hands on. And now I am well,
and am going to join my regiment.”

After a few cordial thanks and good wishes we separated, and I have
never seen him since. If these lines fall under his notice, I would
like to hear from him.




HOW MOTHER BICKERDYKE CUT RED TAPE.


The battle of Corinth had raged from early morning till late in the
afternoon, and then General Price was checked and forced to retreat.
The struggle had been a bloody one, and the ground was covered with the
wounded and the dead.

The Confederates made a desperate struggle to capture Fort Robbinette.
General Rogers, or “Texas Rogers” as he was usually called, led the
charge against the fort. Splendidly mounted, with a flag in one hand
and a pistol in the other, he rode up to the very mouth of the cannon,
all the while beckoning his men onward. Reaching the ramparts, he
planted the Confederate flag there, and the next moment fell dead. But
his troops surged up after him, although the cannon of the fort mowed
down great swaths of marching men, as with set faces and bowed heads
they followed their leader.

The scenes that followed were indescribable. The human avalanche surged
up into the fort, and men, hand to hand, contended for the mastery.

The Confederate flag waved only for a moment. Then it was torn away,
and the men who had climbed up over the ramparts were hurled back. But
still fresh relays came on. When there was not time to reload their
guns, the invaders used them as clubs, and the fragments of many a
shattered musket were left upon the field. Texas Rogers’s horse, which
had gone back riderless, came dashing up again when the next charge was
made, as though guided by human hands, and once more turned and went
back. After the bloody conflict ended, it was found that forty-two men
lay dead in a heap where “Texas Rogers” planted his flag and died.

Hungry and utterly exhausted as were the men, who, without food or
rest, had fought all day, their first duty was to their wounded
comrades. Every available building, and every church but one, was
taken for hospital purposes; and long rows of tents were put up on the
grounds of the Ladies’ College. But there was a lack of supplies. There
were no cots or pillows--only the bare ground.

Among the heroic workers there, was Mother Bickerdyke, who could always
find supplies if they were within reach. She took some wagons and a
squad of men, and went down to the quartermaster’s storehouse. “Come
on, boys,” she said; “we will see if we can find anything to make the
wounded comfortable.”

The quartermaster was there to receive her, and to say, “We have no
hospital supplies; they are all given out.”

“Then, I’ll have to take what I can get. Boys, roll out some of those
bales of hay and cotton! They will make better beds than the ground.”

“You must bring me an order, madam.”

“I have no time to hunt up officers to get orders.”

“But I am responsible for these supplies, and cannot let them go
without proper orders.”

The wagons were soon loaded up, and the bales of hay and cotton were
soon at the hospital tents. An axe cut the hoops, and the hay went
flying into the tents in long even rows with the help of ready hands.
An armful of cotton made a good pillow. All night long the work went
on. Some with lanterns were searching among the dead for the wounded
and bringing them in; others dressing the wounds. No one was idle. The
utmost of strength and energy must be put forth at such a time.

But the quartermaster must make his accounts all right, and of course
had to enter complaint against Mother Bickerdyke. She was summoned to
meet the charge, which she did when she found time to go.

“Mrs. Bickerdyke, you are charged with taking quartermaster’s stores
without proper orders and over his protest.”

“Who ordered the tents put up on the college grounds?”

“I did.”

“What were they put up for?”

“To shelter the wounded men, of course.”

“Did you expect these wounded men to lie on the ground?”

“You should have obtained orders.”

“I had no time to go for orders. Why didn’t you order in the hay and
the cotton?”

“I did not think of it.”

“Well, I did, and used all I needed; and now all you have to do is to
draw an order for them and give it to the quartermaster.”

She bade the officers good-day and returned to her work, and no one
thought of arresting her. Indeed, she had the best of the argument.

Mrs. Mary A. Bickerdyke, or “Mother Bickerdyke” as the boys used to
call her, was one of the most energetic and faithful workers of the
war. Her fidelity to duty, and her untiring efforts for the comfort
of the sick and wounded, have endeared her to her co-laborers and to
the old soldiers whom she blessed. She now, 1894, lives in quiet and
comfort with her son, Professor Bickerdyke, Russell, Kan.




A FIGHTING EDITOR.


In the spring of 1861, Dr. Charles Elliott edited _The Central
Christian Advocate_, in the third story of a business block in St.
Louis, Mo.

_The Southern Christian Advocate_, which represented the views of
the South, was at the time published in the second story of the same
building.

The two editors, who had always been personally friendly to each other,
were wide apart on the great question of disunion, which was stirring
the hearts of the people.

Dr. Elliott was a genial Irishman of great ability and courage. He was
one of the most learned men in the country. It is a remarkable fact
that he had never been in a college until he was chosen president of
one of the finest Western institutions of learning, yet he was master
of all the highest university studies taught. Sanscrit, Latin, Greek,
Hebrew, French, German, Spanish, and many other languages, were as
familiar to him as the English, and he was profoundly versed in the
natural sciences and mathematics. He was a thorough scholar, and made
a good college president. But the church needed a strong, loyal man,
with the courage to stand for the truth, at this outpost; and Dr.
Elliott was chosen.

Both editors were able and fearless men, and they fought many a hard
battle with their pens before the bombardment of Fort Sumter. After
the fall of Sumter, the excitement in St. Louis ran high. The city was
about evenly divided in sentiment, and no one dared to predict what a
day or an hour would bring forth. The Stars and Stripes, symbolizing
the Union cause, and the State flag, representing the disunion cause,
floated here and there side by side on adjoining buildings. The two
editors grew more intense in feeling as the conflict deepened. Dr.
Elliott’s strong, masterly arraignment of the South for the crime of
slavery, and his cutting sarcasm over secession, were almost unbearable
to the managers of the other paper, and the latter tried to pay him
back with interest; but at first neither one actually unfurled on the
building the banner which represented his principles.

One day news reached St. Louis that General Price had won a victory,
and the editor of _The Southern Christian Advocate_ threw out the State
flag. A few moments afterward a friend came rushing into Dr. Elliott’s
sanctum: “Doctor, they have thrown out the rebel flag down-stairs.”
Dr. Elliott sprang from his editorial chair, and rushed to the front
window. There, sure enough, was the flag of disunion, waving in the
breeze. Dr. Elliott had prepared for just such an emergency. All
the ropes and guys were ready. He ran to a closet, brought forth an
immense Union flag, and threw it out. The next moment it was in its
place, and was waving back and forth before the windows of the office
below, and slapping the other flag furiously. Dr. Elliott laid out a
brace of pistols on his editorial table, and took his seat to await
developments. He did not have long to wait. The tramp of feet was heard
on the stairs, and the editor of _The Southern Christian Advocate_
rushed in with some of his friends.

“Take down that flag!” he thundered.

“I shall not take down that flag; and if any man touches it I will
shoot him on the spot as an enemy of my country,” was Dr. Elliott’s
prompt reply, as he stood, pistol in hand, ready to execute his threat.

After some parley the invading force retired.

Shortly afterward a large Union force was thrown into St. Louis,
martial law was declared, and all the rebel flags were hauled down. The
beautiful flag which Dr. Elliott had displayed in front of his office
continued to wave in triumph until the war was over.




THE FIRST SOLDIERS WOUNDED IN THE CIVIL WAR.

A COLORED MAN THE FIRST TO FALL.


Fort Sumter was fired on April 12, 1861. The next day the Pottsville
Light Infantry, of Pottsville, Pa., tendered their services by telegram
for the defence of the government.

Their services were accepted by Simon Cameron by telegraph; and they,
with recruits gathered on the journey, were the first troops to reach
the capital. There being some question as to the date of their reaching
Washington, Simon Cameron, Secretary of War, being appealed to,
published the following letter:--

                                             PHILADELPHIA, July 4, 1866.

  I hereby certify that the Pottsville Light Infantry was the first
  company of volunteers whose services were offered for the defence of
  the capital at the beginning of the War of the Rebellion. A telegram
  reached the War Department on April 13, 1861, making the tender. It
  was immediately accepted; and the company reached Washington on the
  18th, with four additional companies from Pennsylvania, and these
  were the first troops to reach the seat of government.

                                             (Signed)     SIMON CAMERON.

On July 22, 1861, the United States Congress passed the following
resolution:--

  _Resolved_, That the thanks of the House are due and are hereby
  tendered to the five hundred and thirty soldiers from Pennsylvania
  who passed through the mob at Baltimore, and reached Washington on
  the 18th day of April last, for the defence of the national capital.

Although the day was cold and raw, the people of the loyal town of
Pottsville gathered on the streets and cheered them on their way; and
all along the line till they reached Baltimore, they were hailed with
loyal enthusiasm.

They reached Baltimore April 18; and while passing through that city a
furious mob assailed them, and they fought their way through.

Nicholas Biddle, the only colored man in the company, an old man sixty
years old, was the first Union volunteer to shed his blood for the life
of the nation in our recent Civil War.

It is a significant fact that the first man killed in the Revolutionary
War was a colored man,--Crispus Attucks.

Nicholas Biddle was not killed, but was struck on the head with a stone
dropped from a building, and fell senseless and covered with blood.
His comrades, although fighting a furious mob, did not desert him, but
gathered him up and put him on the cars.

Weary and wounded and bruised and battered by the mob at Baltimore,
they got through alive, and were on the 18th of April quartered in the
rotunda of the Capitol.

Nicholas Biddle, although sixty years old, enlisted and served
throughout the war, and returned to Pottsville with those who survived
the terrible struggle.

He lived till he was eighty years old; and his friends at Pottsville
have erected a monument in his honor, which bears the following
inscription--

                          “IN MEMORY OF
                        NICHOLAS BIDDLE.

              _Died 2d Aug., 1876, aged 80 years._

  His was the proud distinction of shedding the First Blood in
       The Late War for The Union. Being wounded while
           marching through Baltimore with the First
              Volunteers from Schuylkill County,
                      18th April, 1861.

             ERECTED BY HIS FRIENDS OF POTTSVILLE.”

The very next day, April 19, the Sixth Massachusetts Regiment fought
its way through the same cruel, howling mob.




RUNNING THE BLOCKADE AT VICKSBURG.


The ship canal, and all other plans for getting below Vicksburg with
enough boats to transport his troops across the Mississippi River,
having failed, General Grant determined to run the blockade. Seven
gunboats and three wooden steamers were put in condition to make the
perilous trip.

The iron sides of the gunboats were drenched with coal-oil, and the
floors were whitewashed, that the gunners might load their guns by the
light of the whitewash.

The important working machinery of the wooden steamers was protected
by bales of cotton and bales of hay. The smoke-stacks and pilot-houses
were taken down; and the pilots must needs stand at their wheels, and
the captains on the upper decks, with nothing to shield them from the
sharpshooters on the wharves of Vicksburg.

All this preparation was done as secretly as possible.

But the service was a dangerous one, and no one was to be ordered into
such unusual and dangerous service. A call was made along the line on
dress parade for volunteers. Two thousand brave men stepped to the
front, anxious for the perilous service. As only a few were needed,
lots had to be drawn to obtain the few from the two thousand; and one
young man, who was chosen by lot, was offered one hundred dollars for
his place, but he refused it. I am glad to record that he got through
safely.

About nine o’clock on the night of April 16, 1863, a dark night, I
received a note from Mrs. General Grant, who was with her husband at
Milliken’s Bend, informing me that the boats would run the blockade
that night, and asking me to come over and go with them to witness it.
I accepted the invitation, and accompanied the orderly who had brought
the note. It was dark and raining; but very soon we were, in company
with General Grant, on our way to the steamer that was to bear us to
the point chosen by our fearless leader to witness the running of the
blockade.

When we reached the steamer, we found all the leading generals
there except General Sherman, who had gone below to receive the
fleet. McPherson, Logan, Belknap, Rawlins, Dodge, and all the others
whose names have been made immortal in connection with the siege of
Vicksburg, were there. The boat at once steamed down to Young’s
Point, from Milliken’s Bend; and about midnight all the lights were
extinguished, the fires screened, and the boat dropped down without
the splash of a wheel, near the first batteries of Vicksburg. With
what intense interest we watched for the coming of the fleet, peering
out into the darkness of that black night. At last we saw a gunboat,
blacker than that starless night, creeping past us like some great
monster of the deep. Then another and another, right down under the
guns. They passed the first batteries without being noticed; then the
storm broke upon them in all its fury.

Admiral Porter on his flag-ship, the _Benton_, led the way. The
_Carondelet_, commanded by Captain Walke, and the _Tuscumbia_, followed.

The three wooden steamers were the _Forest Queen_, the _Henry Clay_,
and the _Silver Wave_.

The first shot near us seemed to tear the sky to pieces above our
heads. There was a flash of light all along the water-line of
Vicksburg; great bonfires lighted up the river.

The captain of our boat in his excitement put on steam and started up
the river. General Grant, who was with us on the guards, rushed to
the hurricane deck, and compelled the captain to drop back to the old
position.

Our long line of gunboats were now giving broadside after broadside,
keeping well to the Vicksburg side, while the wooden steamers, with
their heavily ladened scows or barges, ran through as rapidly as
possible, keeping well to the Louisiana side.

The great artillery duel was now on, every gun on both sides of the
line was belching forth shot or shell.

Our boat swayed with the concussion of sound. It was as though a
thousand electric storms had burst upon us in all their fury. And yet
each shot and shell had a voice of its own, and could be heard in
thunder tones with awful distinctness. And running through the bass and
treble of solid shot and screaming shells, the click of the musketry of
the sharpshooters on the wharfs of Vicksburg could be heard, as, by the
light of the bonfires blazing high, they aimed the deadly bullets at
the captains and pilots who stood up unarmed in full view. My friend,
Captain McMillen of Pittsburg, Pa., who owned the _Silver Wave_, and
who commanded her on that expedition, stood on her deck in full view,
amid the terrible rain of fire and lead.[1]

There were, history informs us, on the average, _one hundred and twenty
heavy guns a minute_. The scene was grand and awful. The bonfires were
kept blazing. The _Henry Clay_ burned to the water’s edge, the tongues
of flame leaping above the track of shot and shell. Shells were flying
in every direction; with their burning fuses they made their circles,
dropping down out of the sky like stars of the first magnitude, now and
then some bursting in mid-heaven with a million scintillations of light.

All the officers had gone to the upper deck; and Mrs. Grant and I stood
together, out on the guards, looking out on the grand and awful scene
before us, shivering with agony.

We were neither of us alarmed for our own safety, but were overwhelmed
with anxiety for the safety of our brave soldiers, and the success of
the expedition.

Mrs. Grant was very sympathetic and kindly hearted, and stood there
looking out upon the grand and terrible scenes of war through her
tears. She was a most devoted wife and mother, and, like her noble,
generous-hearted husband, was most heartily interested for the safety
and welfare of the brave men who were fighting the battles of her
country.

“Our men are all dead men.” “No one can live in such a rain of fire
and lead,” we said to each other. “All our fleet, and the heroic men
who manned the boats, are surely swallowed in that fiery channel,” we
moaned with the tears on our faces. Only once, it was while the _Henry
Clay_ was burning, we saw for a moment or two the grand old Stars and
Stripes.

“See! see! there is our flag,” was the glad exclamation; but the next
moment it was hid from our sight by the smoke of the guns.

We stood there, amid the thunders of this greatest artillery duel that
was ever fought in the world, for two long hours, unconscious of danger
or weariness. Then General Grant came down from the upper deck with the
glad news, for he had been watching for the signals or rockets that the
boats, one by one, sent up as they got safely through, that all the
boats were through but the _Henry Clay_. The roar of the cannon had
begun to die away, when our captain, at the command of General Grant,
turned the prow of his boat up the Mississippi River, and steamed
back to Milliken’s Bend. We reached there at daylight, after the most
exciting night I had ever known, or perhaps will ever know again, on
the earth.


FOOTNOTE:

[1] He made the journey safely, and continued to command his boat while
she was in the United States service, which was till the close of the
war. He was one of the few loyal steamboat captains on the Mississippi
River. He lived to enjoy a long season of peace, dying in 1893.




I HAVE THE COMFORTER.


In 1862, just after the terrible battle at Corinth, Miss., I visited
the hospitals in that place. The havoc had been fearful on both sides,
and the wounded of the two armies crowded every ward.

Going into a hospital known as the College Building one day, and
passing from cot to cot, I came to a young man who looked very pale and
weak. I asked,--

“Are you sick or wounded?”

He answered, “I am severely wounded;” and seeing the look of sympathy
on my face, he went on to tell me all about it.

It was a long, sad story that I need not repeat here.

He had fallen in the front of the battle-line, had been taken prisoner,
and had lain out all the night long among the dead; but he said
cheerfully, “When ‘our boys’ found me, they took me up tenderly and
brought me here, and now I am doing well.”

But I felt that he was not doing well, that he was on the verge of
the grave, and that I must speak to him of the future. He went on to
tell me of his home,--of a mother and sister and two little brothers in
Benton County, Iowa, and added,--

“When I get well enough, I hope they will give me a furlough and let me
go home.”

I said tenderly, “I hope you will get well; but how will it be if you
should not? Are you ready to die?”

I never shall forget his answer; it has been ringing through my soul
all these years. It was as though he was transfigured before me; there
came into his face such light and joy, as, laying his hand on his
heart, he said, “I have the Comforter!” What volumes in that sentence!
I did not need to ask him to what denomination he belonged, or when
or where he had found the pearl of great price. It was enough for me
to know that he had the Blessed Comforter which Jesus promised to his
disciples.

But he went on talking sweetly of Christ and heaven, and the power
of Christ to keep. “Religion,” he said, “has kept me through all the
temptations of camp-life, and now I am ready to _live_ or to _die_. If
the Master sees that it is best that I should go now, it will be as
near heaven from Corinth as it would be from Iowa.”

It was evening time, and I went my way. The next morning I was early at
that hospital, and first of all went to look after him, but I found
his place vacant.

I said to the ward-master, “Where is the young man who was lying here
by this post?”

He answered, “He is dead.”

Oh, how his words went to my heart!

“Where have you laid him?” I asked.

He led the way out into the back yard, and there, side by side, stood
the seven cot bedsteads that held the seven dead men that had been
carried out the night before. He pointed out his cot, and left me alone
with the dead. The bed-spreads were drawn up over their faces, and that
was all that was between the dead faces and the sky.

I drew down the bedspread to look upon his face. I never can express
the emotions of that moment. My heart was thrilled; for there upon
the dead soldier’s face was the very same look of joy and peace that
was on his face when he said, “I have the Comforter,” and I knew that
the Comforter had been with him till the last. I wrote to his mother,
telling her the sad story of his sufferings, and the sweet, sweet story
of his Christian triumph.

After a while an answer came back to me. She did not know that he was
wounded or dead until she received my letter.

His death was a heavy blow; but she rose in Christian triumph above her
great sorrow, and in closing her letter said,--

“My son may not come back to me, but I shall go to him, and it is
just as near heaven from Iowa as it was from Corinth; and _the same
Comforter that comforted my son when wounded and dying among strangers
comforts me now_.”

What a glorious Christianity we have! A religion that can keep under
the sorest trials, that can comfort in the deepest agonies, and that
can give joy and peace in the presence of death, and _leave its divine
stamp upon the dead clay_.




BLOWING UP OF FORT HILL.


Along the lines of Vicksburg during the siege, there was no stronger
point than Fort Hill. The land stood high, and the approach was almost
perpendicular at some points. In the assignment of troops to positions,
General John A. Logan’s division was placed in front of Fort Hill.
General Logan was a man of energy, and a great fighter. With the
consent of his superiors in command, he planned to mine Fort Hill. The
work was begun at a distance in the rear, behind a bluff, so as to hide
the operation from the Confederates. General Logan’s engineers, with
scientific precision, directed the tunnel toward Fort Hill. There were
weary days and nights of digging before they reached the foundation of
the fort. But there came to the ears of the Confederates at last, even
amid the thunder of the cannon and the screaming of shells, the sounds
of the mining. Night after night they listened with their ears to the
ground to the sound of the Union picks. The Confederates soon began
to countermine, and it was not long before the toilers in the Union
tunnel heard the thud of the Confederate picks nearly over their heads.
They were too high to strike the Union tunnel, but it was evident
that no time must be lost in blowing up the fort. Tons of powder were
carried in, and one bright afternoon about two o’clock the slow fuse
was lighted and the tunnel was cleared. The regular firing of the
battle was going on. There was nothing in the movements of the army to
indicate that anything unusual was about to occur.

As I was driving around the lines that day, I met General McPherson and
his staff, riding at full speed. Halting, he said,--

“You are going in the wrong direction. Fort Hill will be blown up in a
few minutes. Better drive to General Logan’s headquarters.”

“Oh, no,” I answered; “I’ll be near enough to see the terrible tragedy.
It will be heart-breaking.”

They galloped on; but I lingered along the roadway in sight of Fort
Hill.

Suddenly a terrific explosion shook the foundations of the earth, and
the heavy timbers of the fort and tons of earth were lifted skyward.
The next moment the dust and smoke hid everything from view. General
Logan and his men pushed into the breach, hoping to effect an entrance
before the Confederates had recovered from the shock; but a glittering
wall of bayonets met them, and they were pushed back inch by inch. All
that afternoon and evening hand-grenades were tossed back and forth as
in a game of baseball; but an entrance could not be made.

A strange incident occurred at the blowing up of Fort Hill, which is
perhaps without a parallel. There was at the time of the explosion
a slave boy about eighteen years old working with others in the
Confederate tunnel. This boy was lifted up with timbers and tons
of earth, and thrown into the Union lines. He fell among the men
of Williams’s Battery of Ohio. When the men ran to pick him up, he
exclaimed with terror, “Is you Yanks goin’ to kill me?”

“Oh, no; we don’t kill colored folks,” was the prompt reply.

“Oh, golly, I went up free miles.”

“Could you see anything?” was asked.

“When I’se goin’ up,” he said, “’most eberything was comin’ down, and
when I’se comin’ down ’most eberything was goin’ up.”

“Who commanded Fort Hill?” inquired one of the gunners.

“My massa,” replied the boy.

“Where is your massa now?”

“’Fore God, genl’men, I can’t tell you; he was goin’ up when I’se
comin’ down.”

Pictures of the boy were preserved by Williams’s Battery, taken soon
after the explosion, showing the boy in the patched tow garments he
wore in his wild flight for liberty. General Logan kept him at his
headquarters for some time.

I saw him there many times. After the war he went to Washington with
them I think, and remained some years.




GETTING 2,000 SICK AND WOUNDED OUT OF HELENA, ARK.


On the 10th of August, 1863, accompanied by my secretary, Miss Mary
Shelton, now Mrs. Judge Houston of Burlington, Iowa, I started on my
return trip to Vicksburg, with a heavy shipment of hospital supplies.

The _Van Phul_, the steamer on which we took passage at St. Louis,
reached Helena, Ark., on the 16th of August.

When the boat landed at that post, we found, on inquiry, that there
were over two thousand sick and wounded there, and so stopped over with
a part of our supplies, the rest going on to Vicksburg, where I had a
covered barge that had done duty on the Yazoo River during the siege,
but which was then lying at the wharf of Vicksburg.

We found the hospitals at Helena, if they may be called hospitals, in
a dreadful condition. The Methodist and Baptist churches were crowded
with very sick and severely wounded men.

There were very few cots in these two churches; most of the men were
lying in the narrow pews, with the scant, uneven cushions for their
beds. The weather was extremely hot, and flies swarmed over everybody
and everything. The faces of some of the men, who were too helpless
to keep up a continual fight with them, were black with swarms of
hungry, buzzing flies. A few pieces of mosquito-bars were spread over
the faces of some of the weakest patients; but, lying loose over
their faces, they were of little advantage. Barrels in which had been
shipped pickled pork now served as water-tanks, and were placed near
the pulpit. They were filled every morning with the tepid water of the
Mississippi River.

There was a barge of ice lying at the landing, brought down on purpose
for the sick; but I could find no one who had authority to issue it,
and so it was slowly melting away under the blaze of an August sun.

The men in charge were, however, willing to sell, and I had money to
buy; and soon great crystal cakes of Northern ice were floating in
every barrel of water in every hospital in Helena.

Acres of tents had been pitched by the roadside; and the mud, that in
the winter had made the streets and roadways almost impassable, had now
turned to dust, and every breeze sent it in clouds into the faces of
the sick and wounded men.

There was another camp, called the Convalescent Camp, on the sandy
beach of the river, the water being very low at the time. We found
no convalescence there. The sun beat down on the white tents and the
glistening sand till the heat was like a furnace.

Just back of these hospital tents and churches, there was a wide
cypress swamp, stagnant and green and deadly.

The men were discouraged. “We have been left here to die;” “No man
could recover in such a place as this,” was the verdict of all who had
the strength and courage to express their feelings. The air was heavy
with the deadly malaria, that ladened every breeze with poison.

It was good service to provide them with light hospital garments to
take the place of their heavy soiled clothing, and with delicate
food to take the place of coarse army rations; but, as one man said,
“It’s no use, ladies; we are all doomed men. It is only a question of
time--your efforts will only prolong our suffering; we are all the same
as dead men.”

For two long days, through sun and dust, we went from hospital to
hospital, till we, too, became hopeless.

Every wrong that they had suffered, every peril that had threatened
them, was burned into our hearts and brains, till they became our own.

There were no high officials that we could appeal to. General Steele
was pushing the Confederate forces toward Little Rock. There was no one
having authority nearer than Memphis, Tenn.; and I determined to go to
Memphis, and invoke the help of the authorities there.

I waited for an up-bound steamer all night. I could not sleep; my heart
and brain and blood seemed to be on fire. Thousands of despairing,
suffering men were all around me; it seemed as if sleep had forever
left my eyes and slumber my eyelids. All night long I waited for an
upward-bound steamer, and while I waited I wrote letters to the wives
and mothers of the men who had asked me to write for them. About
daylight a boat came up from Vicksburg, bound for St. Louis; and I
boarded her for Memphis, leaving Miss Shelton at the house where we had
taken board, to complete the task of letter-writing. When I reached
Memphis, I drove directly to the office of the medical director. An
orderly was the sole occupant of the office. He informed me that the
medical director had gone out hunting, and would not be back till
evening. I was greatly disappointed, as I had hoped much from him, but
I was not discouraged. I decided to appeal to the commanding general.

The adjutant-general was the only person in the office.

“I wish to see the general,” I said, addressing the adjutant.

“The general is sick to-day, and cannot see any one. Perhaps he can see
you to-morrow.”

“My business is important and urgent; I cannot wait till to-morrow.
Will you take a message to the general for me?”

“I cannot do that, madam; the general is very sick, and I cannot
disturb him, but perhaps I can attend to the business.”

Thus encouraged, I began in a very energetic manner a statement of the
condition of the sick and wounded at Helena. In the midst of it the
door opened, and the general stood before me. I took in the situation
in an instant, realizing that, sick or well, or whatever his condition,
he was the man who had the authority, and I immediately turned to him
with the case. I pleaded for those men as one would plead for his own
life, and I concluded with a definite request: “I want you, General, to
send down four steamers immediately, fitted out with cots and supplies,
to bring all these suffering men away from that death-trap.” He said
that it should be done. “But, General,” I continued, “I want the order
issued before I leave this office. I want to go back and tell the men
that the boats are coming--it may save some lives.”

“I assume, madam, that the order has been given,” said the adjutant,
“and I will promulgate it immediately.”

“May I depend on you to send the boats down there by to-morrow noon?”

“The boats will be there without fail.”

“Remember,” I said, “I have no other appeal but the newspapers and the
great, generous people of the North who sustain them, if you fail.”

“I hope, dear madam, that you will make no mention of this in the
papers--the boats will be there.” These last words were uttered as he
closed the door of my carriage. I hurried away, as a steamer was coming
in, and I desired, if possible, to get back to Helena that night.

I felt a little more certain of the boats coming because of my threat
to appeal to the North through the newspapers, of which officials stood
in some fear. There were, however, other reasons why I was justified
in putting the case in that way of which it is not best to speak now.
I reached Helena at half-past eleven o’clock that night, full of hope,
and ready to rest and sleep.

The next morning early we were out in the hospitals, not for the
purpose of distributing supplies, but as the messengers of glad
tidings. And never did women go with gladder hearts to bear good
news, since Mary left the tomb of her risen Lord, than we did that
morning, as we went from hospital to hospital telling the men the boats
were coming. We went to the two churches first; and in each I took a
position in the pulpit, and called out at the top of my voice,--

“Attention, soldiers! Four hospital steamers will be here to-day to
take you to Northern hospitals.” The effect was magical. Men who were
lying seemingly half-dead in their hopeless despair lifted their heads,
and questioned anxiously,--

“What did you say?” and the glad message was repeated again and again,
with the assurance that the boats would surely come.

“Then I’ll get well.” “Where are my shoes?” “Where is my hat?” and so
we left them getting ready for the journey, and went from hospital to
hospital with the glad message.

In one tent by the roadside, a beautiful brown-eyed boy about sixteen
years old, after I had made the glad proclamation, questioned, “Is that
so, lady?”

“Yes, it is so; we are looking for the boats every minute.” He slipped
out of his cot; and, kneeling beside it, he lifted his eyes heavenward,
and the tears running down his face, he repeated over and over,--

“Thank God, deliverance has come at last.”

In one ward a man looked at us very earnestly, and then questioned,--

“Is it the truth ye are telling us, now?”

“Yes, it is the truth.”

“Now, surely, ye wouldn’t be after decavin’ a poor sick man that’s most
dead with the heat, and the flies, and the cypress swamp, would ye,
now?”

“No, sir, I would not.”

My anxiety was intense. What if the boats should not come? I stepped
out of the tent and looked up the river, and there in full view the
little fleet of four boats were coming around the bend of the river.

We both cried out in our joy, “The boats! the boats are coming!” but
tears of thankfulness almost choked our voices. The excitement was
intense. No one stood on the order of his going. The surgeons were
willing all should go, and desired to go with them, and they did. Every
man who could, rushed for the boats. Some who were not able to walk
managed some way to get from their cots and crawl out toward the boats.

Oh! it was pitiful to see the helpless ones, the wounded ones, who
could not move, waiting with anxiety for their turn to be carried to
the boats, and pleading, “Please, ladies, don’t let me be left behind.”

“No, no! Don’t be alarmed, you shall go,” was repeated over and over.
At last all were crowded into the four steamers, and the boats steamed
away with their precious freight up the Mississippi River. We stood at
the landing as the boats moved away. The poor fellows out on the guards
tried to give three cheers, but the effort was a failure. We waved our
handkerchiefs, and they waved their hats, or their hands, as long as
the boats were in sight.

What a load of anxiety and responsibility was lifted from our hearts!

Gathering up the supplies still left over, we took the first steamer
bound for Vicksburg.

When we reached the conquered city we found thousands of sick and
wounded still crowded into the hospitals there, and we remained for
some time ministering to them as best we could.




THE CLOCK AT VICKSBURG.


Vicksburg was situated on a high bluff. In the centre of the town stood
the Court House.

On the Court House tower, there was a large white-faced clock, that
turned its four white faces to the four points of the compass. Very
early in the struggle, while yet the army was on the west side of the
river, the artillerymen of the Union army attempted to destroy that
clock, and by stopping the time confuse the enemy. There was quite a
rivalry as to who should with shot or shell dash that clock to pieces.

But somehow they could not hit the clock. The rivalry continued;
and when the army environed Vicksburg, there were eighteen miles of
batteries pointing towards the town and often turned towards the clock.
Shot and shell flew thick and fast, riddling the flag that waved above
the clock, tearing away part of the stairway below, and chipping the
casement that enclosed it. But steadily the hours and days went by,
till weeks lengthened into months, and yet the clock untouched and
unhalting measured off time.

After the surrender I climbed the broken stairs, and saw the damage the
shot and shell had done. The framework was chipped all around. But I
found out why the shot and shell could not hit the clock.

Aunt Dinah, the cook, had said to me,--

“You o’ter see our preacher--he’s the powerfulest preacher in dis town,
he is.”

I expressed a willingness to see him, of which I suppose he was duly
informed by Aunt Dinah, as he called the next day.

He was a middle-aged man of strong muscular frame; and his face, which
was black, was surmounted by a wealth of white hair. I found him very
intelligent, and he gave me a great deal of information about the life
in Vicksburg during the siege. At last I asked him how it happened that
the colored people’s church, a large brick structure, was in ruins.

“Was it destroyed by shot and shell?” I inquired.

“No, missus; no shot nor shell ever cum near dat church; but you see we
colored people ust to go dare to pray, an’ we prayed mighty powerful
for de Yanks an’ for freedom. Den de white people da cumed, an’ den we
had secret prayer. Somebody would say, ‘We’ll have secret prayer,’ den
we knode jus’ what to pray fur. But de white folks dey ’spicioned wat
we wus praying fur, and dey tore dow’ de church.”

“And that stopped your praying?”

“Oh, no, missus; dat couldn’t stop our praying. We jus’ ’greed to pray
when de town clock struck twelve night or day.”

“Why, our men tried to stop that clock; hundreds of guns were turned
upon it during the siege, but somehow they did not happen to hit it.”

The old man’s face was radiant. The joy of his heart was shining
through the black skin, as he swayed and clapped his hands. “Oh, honey,
dar’s no happen about dat. De good Lor’ he jus’ put his han’ over it,
and kep’ it goin’ an’ goin’ for us poor color folks to pray by.”

What perfect trust! It is easier to accept the theory of the old
colored preacher than to explain why it was that the army, with a
cordon of guns pointing toward that clock, did not reach the clock, or
stop the regular swing of its pendulum, or the merry chimes of its bell.

Mrs. Margaret E. Sangster and myself met at the house of a mutual
friend on the banks of the Hudson River one beautiful cloudless
day, and I told her this story of the clock at Vicksburg, and she
immediately wrote the following poem:--




THE CLOCK AT VICKSBURG.

MARGARET E. SANGSTER.


  Month by month the shot and shell
  ’Round the ’leaguered city fell.

  Through its fiery tropic air
  Throbbed the anguish of despair.

  Stubbornly the fated gray
  Struggled through each pallid day.

  Stubbornly the loyal blue
  Fought the weary conflict through.

  High above the central square
  Towered the old clock, white and fair.

  Steadily its iron tongue
  Over strife and silence rung.

  Till the sullen foemen swore
  “They shall keep that clock no more.”

  All day long with bated breath
  Life looked steadily at death.

  Little ones forgot to play,
  Christians ne’er forgot to pray.

  Fair through all the siege it stood,
  That old clock in sober mood,

  As though now and then ’twould frown
  On the sadness of the town.

  Whistling balls around it flew,
  Black against the sky’s deep blue.

  All untouched, it told the time
  With a regnant cheery chime,

  Till the hour when victory
  Broke the spell--the place set free.

  *       *       *       *       *

  In the city’s open square
  Swarthy faces sobbed in prayer,

  “Bless the Lord! the work is done;
  Bless the Lord! our freedom’s won.

  By that clock in yonder street,
  True as steel our sad hearts beat.

  In our homes or by the way,
  When it struck, we paused to pray.

  _At its noon-hour day by day
  Every bondsman stopped to pray._”

  Was it strange that old clock stood
  Safe amid the storm of blood?

  Why, of course it could not fall,
  Guarded by the Lord of all,

  Who through choiring songs of heaven
  Hears the cry of earth’s forgiven.

  And till now its honest face
  Is a witness of His grace.




SHARING POOR QUARTERS WITH DOROTHY L. DIX.


In the winter of 1864-1865, the Union forces were concentrated in front
of Petersburg and Richmond. There was more or less skirmishing and
fighting all the while between the two great armies facing each other
for the last desperate struggle.

The hospitals were overcrowded at City Point and Point of Rocks. Every
cot was occupied, every tent was crowded, and the thousands of troops
coming down quartered wherever they could find a vacant place.

I had not been in the cabin of a steamer bound for City Point very
long till Miss Dorothy L. Dix came in. After the usual greetings, she
informed me that she, too, was going to City Point.

Miss Dix was the stateliest woman I ever saw, and she was very
dignified in manner and conversation.

Although at that time she was about sixty years old, she was tall,
straight as an arrow, and unusually slender. Her hair, which was
abundant, was very dark brown, almost black, and was combed and coiled
on the top of her head, except two locks in front, which were combed
smoothly over each ear and carried in a loop up over the coil on top
of her head. This peculiar manner of dressing her hair seemed to add
to her height and dignity. Her dress was always exceedingly plain,
but neat, and her linen collar and cuffs were always immaculate. She
wore no jewels, not even a breastpin. She required the same degree of
plainness on the part of her nurses.

It was not long after the boat left the dock at Washington till we had
passed Alexandria and Mount Vernon, and were steaming on to Fortress
Monroe at the mouth of the Potomac, with the ocean in full view.

There was always a long stop at this point, as it was not only a strong
military station, well-fortified and strongly guarded by troops and
gunboats, but it was a great hospital centre. Thousands of sick and
wounded lay sorely stricken in these great barracks and tents by the
sea.

It was about nine o’clock that evening when we reached City Point. We
had discussed the question of lodging before we left the boat, and Miss
Dix had said,--

“I have no concern. There are always plenty of cots, and I’ll find room
in some of the nurses’ tents,” and she urged me to go with her.

But I was equally confident, and assured her that the Christian
Commission would take care of me. Mr. Cole, of Boston, the chief agent,
was standing beside a tent, in deep thought, when I approached. When he
saw me he lifted up his hand in dismay.

“I have no place for you; every foot of space is occupied,” was his
greeting.

“How about the little tent where I stayed the last time?”

“It is full of delegates lying on the ground on their blankets. I’ve
given up my little corner to Dr. ----, and have no place to sleep
myself.”

“How about the storeroom?”

His face brightened.

“I never thought of that; but it’s full of barrels and boxes, and is
not in order.”

“No matter; there will be shelter and room, and there is a lock on the
door, and I’ll get on all right.”

A candle and some matches were procured, and, accompanied by the agent
and his assistant, I went into the storeroom near by. It was a great,
rough, strong plank barracks; boxes and barrels were piled up nearly
to the roof. There was a vacant space where they handled the supplies,
near the door.

“There is not a cot on the premises; they have all been taken for the
sick and wounded. What will you do?”

“I’ll sleep on the floor, of course,” I answered cheerfully.

But they turned some of the boxes around, and gathered up all the straw
and shavings that were in sight, that had been used in packing, and put
them together, and I placed my satchel for a pillow; and after I had
assured them that it would be all right, they left, and I locked the
door after them.

They had not been gone ten minutes till there was a knock at the door.
I went very close to the door and called,--

“What is wanted?”

“Mrs. Wittenmyer, Miss Dix is here, and she has no place to stay. Can
she come in?”

“Certainly; of course she can.”

And I opened the door, and that stately woman, with all her dignity
upon her, which was really a part of herself, entered, glad to find
even such a shelter as that. My candle lighted up the building
sufficiently to show its unsightliness, and the dust and rubbish that
were all about us. As Miss Dix was old enough to have been my mother,
of course there was but one thing to do, and that was to give up my bed
of shavings and straw to her, and with the stub of an old broom try to
clear a place on another part of the floor for myself. She generously
offered to divide her bed; but there was not enough to divide, so I
spread my blanket-shawl down on the rough, uneven floor for my bed, and
I took my satchel for a pillow.

I was weary and anxious, and for a few moments I felt the service was
too hard to be endured much longer. But there came another train of
thought, as I heard the booming of the cannon at no great distance.

“How glad the brave men on the picket-line, where to sleep is death,
the men in the trenches, and working the guns, would be to have a
good dry floor to sleep on, and the right and privilege to sleep,” I
said to myself. Somehow my bed grew soft and my pillow downy, and all
the clouds of care and spirit of self-pity cleared away before the
magic power of patriotism and sympathy for the brave men who stood so
gallantly for my country and its flag; and I never in all my life had a
better bed, or a sweeter night’s sleep.




HARDSHIPS OF CAMP-LIFE AT VICKSBURG.


There was little level ground on which to camp about the lines.
Excavations had to be made to get a level place to sleep. So all the
bluffs around Vicksburg were catacombed to afford sleeping apartments.
No wonder there was sickness--no wonder Death held high carnival
on both sides of the lines. It was not only dangerous, but almost
impossible, to reach the little hospitals under the shadow of the guns.
Very many times driven at full speed I reached them, but it was at
great peril. How the memory of those hospital scenes comes back to me
now!

At one point I went down under the guns of the fort at one of the most
exposed places, with a carriage-load of supplies for the little fort
hospital under the bluff, just behind the heavy guns. I found when
I reached there that the position was so dangerous that it would be
madness, so the officers said, to try to get out of there till I could
go under the cover of darkness. But the afternoon was well-spent in
making lemonade and ministering to the men who had been stricken down
with fever and hardships.

The ceaseless roar of artillery, and scream of shot and shell; the
sharp whiz and whirr of small shot just over our heads; the June sun
blazing down upon us with torrid heat, and no shelter for the sick but
the white canvas tents, perched on the sides of the bluffs in places
excavated for them, the bank cutting off the circulation of air,--were
almost unbearable. How the poor fever-racked heads and fainting hearts
ached amid the ceaseless din and the dust and heat of these little camp
hospitals! One poor fellow, with parched lips and cheeks red with the
fever that was burning through every vein, said, “I got a little sleep
a while ago, and I dreamed that I was at the old spring; but just as I
was taking a good cool drink I waked up.”

I partially met his cravings for a drink from the well at the old home
by giving him generous draughts of lemonade, but when night came on I
had to leave him. Poor boy, I never knew whether he got back to the
old spring and home or not. There was no cool water there to allay his
burning thirst. One of the hardships of that long summer campaign was
the lack of good cool water. There were some springs, and a few wells
were dug; but at points water had to be hauled long distances. Think of
thousands of men to be supplied--of the thousands of horses and mules,
the great burden-bearers of the army, that must have their thirst
quenched.

Most of the water for the use in camp was hauled up from the
Mississippi River or the Yazoo, through the hot sun in barrels, and
stood in camp all day.

During that dreadful day I sat down in one of the tents for a little
while; there was a patch of weeds growing near the tent-door. I noticed
the weeds shaking as though partridges were running through them. I
called attention to the matter, which made the surgeon smile, as he
explained, “Why, those are bullets!”

“Bullets? Do bullets come so near as that?”

“Oh, yes,” he answered cheerfully; “they are flying around here quite
thick.”

“Do you consider yourself safe while in this tent? It seems to me the
bullets are coming very close.”

“It is considered very safe. The bullets fall a little short you see.”

All the while I sat there I watched the bullets coming over and
clipping through the weeds.

Three days from that time an officer was killed while sitting in the
same chair on the same spot where I had sat and watched the bullets
shaking the weeds.




A PAINFUL ACCIDENT.


The smoke of the battle-field at Shiloh had cleared away; the dead
had been buried; the wounded gathered up, and their ghastly wounds
dressed--so that the people who came crowding to the battle-field saw
little of the horror of war.

Among the multitudes who came down with supplies and words of sympathy
and encouragement was Governor Harvey of Wisconsin, a grand, loyal
man. He walked over the battle-field, the scene of the recent terrible
conflict, and through the hospitals improvised for the accommodation
of the thousands who had been wounded, and over the score and more of
steamboats where many of the wounded were quartered.

He had given his promise of support to the men who stood between the
North and the sword and torch of war. And now, with a hasty farewell to
the crowd of distinguished patriots and officers who came down to wish
him Godspeed on his return to the loyal State of Wisconsin, he stepped
upon the single plank that bridged the little space between the shore
and the boat. There were a few steps forward--a misstep--a sudden
plunge, and the flowing tide ingulfed him out of sight. There was a
moment of awful suspense--he did not rise. Men plunged into the water,
reaching out their hands in every direction to find the lost one, but
alas! he was not found till life was extinct.

The boat on which he was going to take passage was lying just above our
sanitary boat, and a number of us saw him make the misstep and fall.

That was a sad day to us all--a sad day for the Army of the
Tennessee--a sad day for the State of Wisconsin--a sad day for the
wife, a grand, noble woman, who, crushed by the heavy blow, waited in
almost speechless agony for the bringing home of her dead.

But in those heroic days women did not sit down in speechless grief
to weep over their dead, but, crushing back their tears, consecrated
themselves to the cause of humanity and their country.

Mrs. Governor Harvey was no exception to this rule. Still staggering
under this stunning blow, she consecrated herself to service in the
Sanitary Commission and to the hospital work, and in blessed and
unwearying service for others solaced her own deep grief. Who shall
know how much comfort and encouragement the presence of this fair,
beautiful, refined lady brought into the hospitals where so many
homesick and pain-weary boys lay on their beds, longing for the sight
of a woman’s face, and tender touch of a woman’s hand?

Often amid the sickening scenes of the overcrowded hospitals, I met her
on her weary round of holy service.

And at the close of the war she was active in the establishment of a
home for the orphan children of soldiers in Wisconsin.




BURSTING OF A SHELL BEHIND MY CARRIAGE.


The line of battle was so closely drawn around Vicksburg that every
camp, and hospital, and wagon-train with provisions and ammunition, was
under fire.

Every worker of the Christian and Sanitary Commissions, who ventured
out to labor with the sick and the dying, knew that the Confederate
sharpshooters at many points were within easy range, and that the
flying shot and shell, that at times almost darkened the sky, were
liable to drop in the pathway of the worker, and blot him or her out of
existence.

None but the more courageous remained on the field. Curiosity-hunters,
and bombastic dress-parade workers, fled from the scene as from a
battle-field; for in truth every inch of ground about Vicksburg was a
battle-field.

The perplexities of the service, and the dangers attending every effort
made to relieve the suffering, were so great, and the laborers in
consequence so few, that every helper was overwhelmed and overworked.

One day, coming in from a weary round, a day’s work of unusual peril
and hardship, we reached a point in the road sheltered from the enemy
by a clump of trees.

Though at no great distance from the Confederate guns, it seemed more
secure because we were out of sight of the frowning batteries.

Suddenly there was a crash in the timber, and we knew and heard no
more. We were all so stunned that we did not know that a shell,
crushing through the tops of the trees, had struck the ground in the
middle of the roadway not forty feet behind our carriage.

If it had come a moment sooner, we would all have been scattered in
fragments to the four winds.

As it was, the road was torn up so that it was impossible for teams to
pass till it was repaired; the horses fell to the earth, the driver
seemed dazed for a time, the carriage was covered with the dirt thrown
out, for an ox might have been buried in the pit that that one shell
dug out. Though it was the main thoroughfare, along which much of the
ammunition and provisions were hauled, fortunately no teams were nearer
than our own, and no one was killed or hurt.

If these lines should fall under the eyes of George, the driver, a
soldier detailed for that service, he will excuse me for saying that
he was about the worst frightened person I ever saw. That evening he
said,--

“I wish you would release me, and ask for some one else. I’d rather be
with my regiment behind the fortifications than driving around this way
all the time.”

“You’ll feel better about it in the morning, George--you will get
over the shock. And then, too, remember that those who are behind the
fortifications may be ordered at any time to make a charge, which would
be more dangerous than the work you are now doing. But think about it;
and if in the morning you would rather go back to your regiment, I will
have the change made.”

The next morning George was all right, and he continued to drive for me
until after Vicksburg was taken.




MEETING A REBEL WOMAN AT NASHVILLE.


There was great rejoicing over the fall of Fort Henry and Fort
Donelson. The gunboats and transport vessels were pressing on to
Nashville, which was occupied by the Union army soon after the fall of
Fort Henry and Fort Donelson. I went up on the first transport.

The women were mostly left behind in the scramble to get out of the
city, and they were more intense in war spirit and partisan feeling
than the men. In the heat of the excitement the chief hotel was
thronged with both parties, where I took lodgings. The women sung
ditties about Beauregard and Davis before the door of my bedroom till
midnight, at intervals.

The great parlor of the hotel was a scene of the utmost confusion,
judging from the tumult of angry voices.

The women blamed the men about them. “Every man who is able to bear
arms ought to be ashamed to be seen outside of a war-camp in days like
these,” was the sharp rejoinder of a woman to her husband. I did not
hear his answer, but suppose from her reply that he said he would only
be throwing away his life.

“Throwing away your life, indeed! A man that is not true to our cause
at such a time _ought not to live_.”

Some one was sitting at the piano, and banged the keys of the
instrument in wildest fury to drown the sound of the contentions.

The next morning, in the dining-room, every Southern man and woman
gave us all a wide berth, not deigning to sit at the same end of the
dining-room.

After breakfast I went for a few minutes into the parlor. The lady
whose voice I heard in falsetto the night before followed me,
accompanied by her colored nurse-girl carrying her baby, perhaps six
months old.

I had no purpose of controversy in my heart; and so when the lady said,
“My baby is named after the best man in the world--Beauregard,” I only
smiled.

“I suppose you Yankees think you can conquer us?”

“That is what the people of the North hope to do.”

“Well, you can’t. There is not men enough in the North to conquer us;
for when you kill the men off, the women will take up arms.”

“Well, madam, there are thousands of men gathering and drilling in
the North, and they will soon be here; and it’s their firm purpose to
maintain the Union, cost what it will.”

“They’ll kill the women, will they?”

“They will _conquer the South_.”

“Contemptible hirelings! they’ll kill the women, will they?” she hissed.

“I don’t think they want to kill the women; but if that is necessary
for the maintenance of the Union, I suppose they will have to do it.”

“Wretches! wretches! They’ll kill the women, will they?” she screamed,
and her eyes blazed fire and scintillated like the eyes of a maniac.
I thought she was going to leap upon me in her fury. We were standing
facing each other; and I made up my mind that if she did assault me
that I would do my little share of fighting, and choke a little of
the treason out of her. But she changed her mind, and rushed from the
room, slamming the door after her with such force as to shake the house
to its foundations. A year after that she was playing the _rôle_ of
a Union woman, and was quite popular as a loyal Southerner among the
officers.

No one in these calm days can imagine the fiery, cruel spirit of war. I
was not afraid; the Stars and Stripes were over us, and the Union army
within call.

But what seems laughable to me now, was exceedingly exasperating and
insulting at that time. There is no question about the matter--the
Southern women, in their blind, partisan fury, prolonged the contest to
the last extreme of desperation. They could not believe defeat possible.

  No longer we hear the clash of arms,
  And the cannon’s fearful booming;
  No longer the torch of war alarms,
  Our cities and homes consuming:
  The smoke of battle has cleared away,
  And Peace her vigil is keeping,
  Though wet with tears are the flowers we lay,
  Where our gallant dead are sleeping.




VISITING HOSPITALS UNDER THE GUNS.


I came down the river with a heavy lot of supplies at the beginning
of the siege. I sent an order to the quartermaster for an ambulance.
Instead of sending the ambulance, he sent me a fine silver-mounted,
easy carriage captured at Jackson, which I afterwards found drew the
fire of the enemy.

It was reported in Vicksburg that an old, experienced general, too
crippled to ride on horseback, made his rounds in that carriage, and
the Confederates made it a target every day.

One captain of sharpshooters told Dr. Maxwell of Davenport, Iowa,
that his men had sent more than a hundred shots after that carriage,
supposing some high official was the occupant. He was very much shocked
to know that they had been shooting at a lady. In most cases the shot
fell low, but the wheels were chipped till they were quite a curiosity.

I drove out in company with Mrs. General Stone to the nearest hospital
one day. We had gone through the tents, and attended to the business
that had brought us, and were standing beside the carriage, when a
shell from Vicksburg burst near us, scattering fragments all around us.
To me the shock was terrific. I could feel my flesh crawl in the most
uncomfortable way, and every hair on my head seemed to stand upright.

“Are you so near the enemy’s guns?” I questioned.

“Oh, yes; all the hospitals are under fire. A shell burst in this
hospital a few days ago, killing one man and wounding three others.”

“It’s horrible that sick men must be placed under fire. Why don’t the
authorities remove the sick and wounded to a safe distance?” I spoke
with some spirit.

“You forget,” said the surgeon, “that General Johnson’s army is near,
and that we are forced to draw in our lines. We would rather take the
risk of a random shell than to risk being between two contending armies
during a battle.”

That was quite another view of the matter, and now I was brought face
to face with the facts of the situation. If I visited the hospitals
I must do it under fire. I had been under fire before, but only for
an hour. To go out day after day under a rain of lead was quite a
different thing.

I went back to the Sanitary boat at the Yazoo Landing in a very
thoughtful mood. The muddy, sluggish stream was well named Yazoo,
meaning the River of Death.

That night was spent in prayer. The next morning I arose with a courage
born of faith. I seemed immortal; not a bullet had been moulded that
could hit me.

I went out to my work without a fear. My carriage was struck time and
again, and bullets whizzed past me, but never a feeling of fear crept
into my heart. I was “under the shadow of His wings, and he covered me
with His feathers.”

Mrs. General Stone, whose husband commanded the right wing of the army,
and who now lives at Mount Pleasant, Iowa, camped with her father out
on the bluffs. She invited me to leave the sluggish river with its
miasma, and come up and stay with her; and I accepted the invitation.
She had a beautiful tent put up beside her own; and as the lizards were
very abundant, the feet of our cots were put in jars of water, and we
tucked up the covers about us so as to keep them off of our beds. We
could hear their little feet scratching as they raced after each other
over the tents.

The soldiers got used to them, but somehow we women shrank from contact
with anything so nearly akin to the serpent family.

Night and day the battle went on. The shells with their burning fuses
would sail up into mid-air like stars of the first magnitude, and burst
into a shower of sparks and fragments, setting the heavens ablaze with
their scintillation, and jarring the foundations of the earth with the
thunder of their explosions.

We became so accustomed to the horrid sounds of war that the absence or
abatement of it would awaken us out of our sleep.




EXHIBITIONS OF MOTHER-LOVE.

TO WHAT LENGTHS AFFECTIONS WOULD CARRY WOMEN IN THE WAR.


War brought heavy burdens of anxiety and sorrow to the women on both
sides of the lines during the terrible struggle of 1861-1865. The
anxious waiting for news from the battle-field, the heart-breaking
scrutiny of the list of wounded and killed, cannot, with their sorrows,
be measured by words and phrases.

One Philadelphia mother, whose husband and son were in the war,
received news that her son had been killed in one of the smaller
battles of Virginia. She determined to recover the body, and bring it
home for burial. After many delays and hindrances, she reached the
regiment of which he was a member. She had walked three miles to get
there, and had left the casket she had brought down at the station,
where fire had destroyed everything but the track.

The soldiers brought up the coffin, and the next morning exhumed
the body. They had wrapped him carefully in his blanket, and marked
the spot with a rough board, on which they had carved his name and
regiment and company with their knives. When they lifted him out, and
laid him at her feet, she recognized him at once.

“Yes, this is my boy,” she said, pushing the damp hair back from his
fair young face.

The soldiers, who were glad to render the heart-broken mother any
service they could, carried the coffin down to the railroad track,
where the station had once stood, and instructed her how to “flag a
train;” and assuring her that “a train might come at any time,” they
left her there with her dead.

There was no human dwelling in sight. She seated herself on her son’s
coffin, beside the charred timbers and ashes, to await the coming of
the train. Behind her was the little valley where the Union troops
were stationed to guard an important pass. On either side of her were
mountains that rose majestically, that might be infested with wild
beasts and creeping things. Before her was a little brook and the bands
of iron along its banks that rendered it possible to make the journey
through that mountain gorge by rail. The afternoon wore away, but no
train came; the shades of night closed her in, but no sound of wheels
greeted her ears.

She built a little fire so as to signal the train. The sharp notes
of the night birds, the fighting of the wildcats on the side of the
mountain, the mysterious noises in the air, the sound of stealthy
footsteps near her,--all fell with fearful distinctness on her ears;
for every nerve was strained to its utmost tension. But no train came
to relieve her weary vigil. Her garments were wet with the dews of
night; and she added wood to the smouldering fire, for the cheerful
blaze comforted her.

As the night wore on, all nature seemed at rest. The night birds ceased
their calls, the wildcats climbed higher up the mountain, and the
whippoorwill ceased its mournful song. But this was even more terrible,
as every remaining sound was more distinct. The rustling of a leaf or a
noise in the bushes sent the blood hurrying to her heart.

At last gray streaks of light began to climb above the mountain in the
east, and were tinged with purple and orange, and soon the white light
of day fell about her; but it was not till late in the afternoon of the
second day that a train came, and her weary vigil ended. For twenty-six
hours she had been alone with her dead.

She reached Washington without delay, and before boarding the train
for Philadelphia saw the coffin of her son put on board. But when she
reached Philadelphia she found that by some mistake the remains had
been left at Baltimore. She telegraphed back, and waited in the station
till they were brought to her, and then followed them to her own house.

Afterward her husband was killed; and she went to the front again, and
secured his body, and brought it home for interment. Who shall measure
the anguish of the women who watched at home till there was one dead in
almost every house?

A mother in Maine received the news that her only son had been wounded
and taken prisoner, and had been sent to Richmond. “I am going to
him,” she said. Her husband and neighbors tried to dissuade her.
On her journey toward the front she called on Governor Andrew of
Massachusetts. “My dear madam,” he said, “I can do nothing for you. The
only thing I could do would be to give you a letter of introduction to
President Lincoln.”

“Well, give me that.”

When she reached Washington she called on the President, and after
a weary waiting was shown into his presence. “Why, madam,” said the
great-hearted Lincoln, “I can do nothing for you. If he were within our
own lines, I would give you a pass, but I cannot send you to Richmond.
At the best, I could only get you beyond our own pickets.”

“Then, please give me a pass beyond your pickets.”

This was done, and she passed the Union lines to fall into the hands of
the Confederate pickets. The latter refused to allow her to proceed.

“I am going right on to Richmond. Shoot if you will.” And she
started on. They did not shoot, but took her into camp, and from the
headquarters of that command she was sent on to Richmond.

When she reached the hospital where her son lay, the surgeon refused to
allow her to see him.

“I must see him! I’m sure it will do him good to see his mother!”

As soon as the son saw her, he cried out,--

“There is my mother! I knew she would come. I’ll get well now.” And
sure enough he did.




THE SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG.


For days there had been unusual activity in the camp. The Fourth of
July was to be celebrated by a general bombardment; and if there
were signs of yielding, a sharp assault and an attempt to capture
the city would be made. The besieged party was not in ignorance of
what was going on. The pickets and sharpshooters, and the soldiers
at points where the fortifications touched each other, had given the
whole programme of a grand Fourth of July celebration in boastful
proclamations. Everything was at fever-heat on the 3d of July, though
the firing was kept up at the usual rate till about one or two P.M.
Suddenly all firing ceased. The silence could almost be felt. There
had been pauses before, lasting an hour or more, during interviews
under a flag of truce. But as the afternoon slowly wore away, and the
firing was not resumed, the excitement became intense. Later, it was
reported that General Grant and General Pemberton had met under a
great spreading oak-tree just inside the Union lines, and that General
Grant had made his terms known in the memorable phrase “_unconditional
surrender_.”

It was a sad hour for Pemberton. His army was starving; his ammunition
and his fighting force were so diminished that to continue the siege
seemed madness. And yet he had held out so long hoping help might
come--it might now be near him--that it was hard to surrender. His was
a fearful struggle. Not many words passed between these two men as they
stood there, a little apart from their staff officers. Later, the time
of the surrender was fixed at 9 A.M. on the Fourth of July, which was
the next morning. The news flew through the camp at lightning speed.
Soon everybody, sick and well, knew that Vicksburg had surrendered. The
firing had ceased, but on both sides every man stood at his post.

There was little sleep for any of us that night; the stillness was so
unusual and impressive, and the excitement so intense, that sleep fled.

The morning of the Fourth dawned fair and beautiful. Very early in the
morning, in company with Dr. Maxwell and Mrs. General Stone, I drove
out to General Logan’s headquarters, whence the army was to begin the
triumphant march into the city.

We took our position on the battlements of Fort Hill, where we had a
full view of the city and surrounding country. The point where we
stood had been more sharply contested than any other. The fort had
been undermined and blown up; and amid the confusion and disaster that
buried a hundred or more in its ruins, an attempt had been made to
scale the fort and enter the city. Before the dust of the explosion had
cleared away a hand-to-hand battle was raging, and hand-grenades were
being tossed as freely as balls on a playground, which exploded with
great destruction. The roar of battle had raged again and again about
that fort, but now all was calm and still at the dawning of this day
of peace. As far as we could see, the muskets were stacked, and white
handkerchiefs were fluttering above them. The Confederate and Union
soldiers stood along the lines in groups, talking as friendly as though
they had never exchanged shot with intent to kill. But there was no
loud talking--all seemed to feel that it was a moment of deep solemnity.

At last the stillness was broken by the tramp of horsemen; and General
Grant, with his staff of officers following, passed near us and honored
us with a military salute,--not with guns, but that peculiar and
graceful lifting the right hand, open, to the full length of the arm,
with a graceful wave, and touching the cap,--a salute we never see in
civil life, unless some old soldier forgets himself. Following close
upon these came General McPherson and his staff. General McPherson
was the most kingly looking man on horseback I ever saw. In personal
appearance he was a prince among men at any time; but on this glad
morning he seemed to be grander and taller under the enthusiasm and
flush of victory than ever before. General Logan followed with his
staff and his division on foot.

We stood there with our field-glasses in our hands, watching them as
they marched down into the city. There was a long halt. They approached
each other forming into long double columns, then we saw, opposite the
blue, the gray forming into lines. Every eye was strained to take in
the scene. There was a movement forward of officers, the flash in the
bright sunlight of swords as they were handed over to the conquerors,
and _then handed back_; for General Pemberton and his staff were
allowed to carry their swords, and enjoy the freedom of the city. They
had conducted an honorable warfare and must not be humiliated.

But now there was another point of interest. The Confederate flag
had floated over the Court House tower through all these months of
conflict, but the Stars and Stripes was now to take its place. Soon
a little glinting of our loved flag came into view. But what could
be the matter? Surely a tangle in the ropes could be adjusted in a
few minutes. All stood in breathless anxiety. Such a delay at such
a time was startling, and every moment seemed an hour to those who
were watching from a distance. At last with rapid sweep the Stars and
Stripes was run up to the top of the staff, and a heaven-sent breeze
unfurled it to our delighted eyes.

What a burst of enthusiasm greeted it. We waved our handkerchiefs,
while men who had faced the cannon’s mouth for the flag sobbed in
their wild joy, and flung their caps into the air. But the Confederate
soldiers, as far as we could see, stood with folded arms, silent,
motionless. And yet with all our gladness that the guns had ceased
to belch forth their murderous fire, there was a deep, fathomless
undertone of sorrow over the cruel, bloody work of red-handed war, that
the glad acclaim of triumph and victory could not drown.




HEALED SOUL AND BODY.


In 1863, just after the fall of Vicksburg, I visited the hospitals in
Helena, Ark. Going into a large ward one day, filled with sick and
wounded soldiers, I saw in the farthest corner of the room a very sick
man. I noticed him the more because he was looking towards me, and
there was upon his face such a look of agony and despair as I had never
seen on any human face before, and I trust I may never see again. I
said to the surgeon, who had stepped in with me,--

“You have one very sick man here.” And when I designated him, he
answered, “Yes, he is almost gone; poor fellow, he’ll not live long.”
I said no more,--my heart was too deeply touched,--but went directly
to him. As I approached his cot-side, I said tenderly, “You seem to be
very sick, my friend.” The look of agony deepened in his face as he
answered,--

“_My friend!_ I have no friend. I am here dying among strangers, and
nobody cares whether I live or die.”

“Oh, don’t say that. You have many friends in the North;” and I was
going to say, “I’ll be your friend,” but I remembered how empty such
a profession of friendship would be on the part of a stranger, and
instead, I said, “There is a _Friend_ that sticketh closer than a
brother. Can’t you make Jesus your friend in this dark hour?”

When I spoke the name of Jesus, he cried aloud,--

“Oh! would that Jesus were my friend; but I am a great sinner.”

“But Jesus is the sinner’s friend.”

“O lady! you don’t know what a wretched sinner I am, to what lengths of
wickedness I’ve run, or you would not think that Jesus could save me.”

But I answered, “You don’t know what a great Saviour we have, or you
would not doubt. He is the mighty God, and he is able to save to the
uttermost; and that means that _he can save you_.”

“It is too late. It is too late!” he cried with such bitterness of soul
that the men lying upon their cots--brave young men, who bore in their
own persons the marks of their heroism--covered their faces with their
bedclothes, and wept like little children.

But I urged that it was not too late, and commenced telling him of the
thief on the cross; but he stopped me.

“Oh, I know about the thief on the cross; but, lady, I am a thousand
times worse than the thief on the cross.”

“If you were _ten thousand times worse, Jesus could save you_; for he
can save to the _uttermost_.”

These words gave hope, and he exclaimed, “Pray for me!”

I knelt by his cot-side; and while he prayed and I pleaded, “the
opening heaven around us shone,” and the mighty power of saving grace
came down upon his soul.

The tempest was stilled, and all was _peace_. I looked up into his face
to see, that in a moment--as it were, in the twinkling of an eye--all
the lines of despair had been taken out of his face, and that it was
beaming with joy; a joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

If I had been an infidel up to that time, it seems to me that I should
have been convicted of the truth of Christianity in that presence.

There were many witnesses to that scene; and it was as though the
Master would show his mighty saving power, for _he healed that man soul
and body_. My secretary was with me. Three days from that time I found
him on the shady side of the house reading the Testament I had given
him the day before. The same look of peace and joy was in his face, as
he said,--

“Oh, I am so happy this morning! I have a _furlough_, and I am going
home. How glad my Christian mother will be to know that I have found
salvation.”

“Young man,” I said, “wherever you go, remember that you were snatched
as a brand from the burning.”

“I can never forget that. My disease and despair were crushing me down.
I must have died if salvation had not come just then; but when you
_spoke the name of Jesus_, I knew you were a Christian, and that you
would help me if you could.”




THE NEW YORK HERALD REPORTER WHO LIVED FOR TWO WORLDS.


Two weeks after the surrender of Vicksburg, I took passage on a steamer
for the North. Just before the boat left the wharf, a gentleman whom I
knew came on board in company with a sick friend, whom he introduced
as Mr. Brown, “Correspondent of the _New York Herald_.” I was so weary
with the scenes of war, with the heat and hard labor which had been
the common lot of all workers during the siege, that I did not want
to talk to any one, much less to a “_Herald_ reporter.” He was sick,
and was going home for a season of rest, so he said. How deceptive
appearances are. I set him down at once as a drinking man, because his
face was flushed and his eyes red; and I determined to be as unsocial
as possible. I did not see him again till evening, when he came back
into the ladies’ cabin and began social conversation.

I determined our talk should be religious, and soon introduced the
subject. He had remarked that we were making headway, and would
probably reach Helena by eight o’clock the next morning. But he said,
“of course there are dangers on every side--sand-bars, snags, and
guerillas. _So we can’t tell where we will be in the morning._”

“It matters little,” I answered, “to those who live for two worlds. We
have the promise that everything shall work together for good to those
who love God.”

“I believe that, and am living for both worlds,” he responded heartily.
Then began one of the most interesting conversations that it has ever
been my privilege to engage in. He was a most deeply pious man, and
through all the army life had walked with God.

As the evening wore on, conversation turned upon heaven, and the joys
and privileges of the redeemed. I remember how his face glowed with
holy enthusiasm as we talked of heaven. He contrasted the noisy, horrid
scenes of war with the peace and sweet harmony of that world of light
and love. He said, “I am prepared for such a blessed change of scenes
at any moment.”

The evening was now well-spent, and bidding him good-night I retired
to my stateroom. The next morning when I stepped out into the ladies’
cabin, I found the captain of the boat waiting for me.

“Did you know the gentleman you were talking with last evening?”

“Yes, slightly.”

“He is dead.”

“Is it possible?”

“Yes, he is dead and cold; he must have died immediately after
retiring. The gentleman who occupied the lower berth noticed his arm
hanging down over the side of the berth when he went to retire, and
spoke to him, but he made no answer; and this morning his arm was just
in the same position.”

Yes, he was dead. He had gone from that talk about heaven right into
the grandeur and glory of all its blessed mysteries. How thankful I was
that our conversation had been about Christian duty and heaven!

My thoughts turned quickly to the widowed mother and the sisters so
well beloved; for he had spoken of them all most tenderly. We were now
nearing Helena, where he must be taken ashore and buried. He had died
of heart disease; and it was that, not drink, which made his face so
flushed.

I wrote to his mother, who lived in Lancaster, Pa., telling her all
I could recall of our talk about God, duty, heaven, and all the
circumstances of our brief acquaintance and his death.

One of his sisters answered my letter, for his mother was quite
prostrated by the shock the news of his death had given her.

She said they were looking for his home-coming every hour, when the
sad message that he was dead and buried reached them. But the sister’s
faith rose triumphantly above it all.

“We all thank God for the loving providence which cast our dear one
in the pathway of a Christian who directed his thoughts and hopes
heavenward at the last. It is a great comfort to us that his faith was
so bright and clear, and that his last thoughts on earth were about
heaven.”




I HAVE THE BEST MOTHER IN THE WORLD.


The thunder of the cannon had ceased at Vicksburg. The artillery and
heavy guns of two great armies were idle and silent; and although more
than one hundred thousand men of war, the conquerors and the conquered,
were in and about the fallen city, it was as quiet and orderly as a
country village. Only the day before, July 4, 1863, I had stood with
friends on Fort Hill and witnessed the surrender; but now, July 5, duty
and conscience led me into the hospitals where the sick and wounded of
the Confederate army were quartered. The hospitals were in a wretched
condition because of lack of supplies, and some of the sufferers had
been lying through all the long siege.

The battle was always on. Night and day the thunder of the guns and the
bursting of shells made night hideous and the day a terror. Every nerve
had been for weeks on the rack--in the battle, and yet unable to lift a
hand for defence. Almost every hospital had been riddled with shells,
and any moment the end might come to any one of them. But now all was
quiet. As I passed through the various hospitals distributing supplies,
I noticed a boy looking wistfully toward me. I went directly to him. As
I took his hand in my own, and looked into his fair frank face, I felt
that any mother might be proud of such a boy.

“Have you a mother?” I asked. Instantly his great brown eyes filled
with tears, as he answered,

“Yes, madam, I have the best mother in the world.”

His answer pleased me greatly, there was so much of heart and
earnestness in it.

“Where does your mother live?”

He mentioned the name of the village near Mobile, Alabama.

“Are you sure she is living there now?”

“Yes, she owns a place in the country near the village. There is
nowhere else for her to live.”

“Would you like to have me write a letter to her about you?”

“You couldn’t do it--it wouldn’t get through the lines.”

“Yes, I can send it. I often send letters. I send them through the
commanding general when a flag of truce passes.”

“Oh, if you can, do have pity on my poor mother! She is such a good
mother. She said to me when I was leaving her: ‘Now, my child, do the
best you can. Whatever may happen, be good and true. Don’t swear or
drink or forget your mother. Remember your mother is praying for you,
and God may have compassion on us and bring you back to me again.’ Oh,
if you could only let her know that I’m alive, and that I’ve been good
and true, I should be so glad,” and at this last outburst the tears ran
down over his face.

I took the directions, and consulted the physician as to his condition;
and that night, before I slept in my new quarters, in a house that had
been assigned me in Vicksburg, I wrote to the mother about as follows:--

  “DEAR MADAM,--I found your son in Vicksburg [giving his name,
  company, and regiment]. He was severely wounded in the battle outside
  of Vicksburg, and was carried into the city.

  His condition is now hopeful. The surgeons tell me he will recover.
  He desires me to tell you that he has been good and true, and has
  never violated your injunctions.

  Though we may differ on the great questions that have led to this
  terrible war, I feel it to be my duty as a mother and a Christian to
  let you know about your son, and that he still lives.

  He will be moved to a Northern hospital; but you can reach him
  with home news by writing to my office, Sanitary Commission, St.
  Louis, Mo. I will arrange with him to notify me each time he changes
  hospitals. You must send your letter unsealed. Write briefly. Say
  nothing about the war or condition of affairs in the South or North,
  and I think you will reach me.”

The next day I drove over to General Grant’s headquarters with that and
some other letters, and gave them to him as I had often done before,
to send through the lines. In a very short time I had an answer from
the mother. This was her reply:--

  “DEAR LADY,--My eyes are full of tears of joy as I write. Your letter
  made a rift in the black clouds of sorrow that have hung over us for
  weeks. It was like a beam of heavenly glory from the Throne. At first
  it seemed too good to believe; but the name and company and regiment
  are all right, and it must be so. Your letter found us all dressed in
  black. I thought I had reliable news that my boy was killed outside
  of Vicksburg, and I did not hope even to find his grave.

  Now we are all dressed in white.”

Then followed some family news, and she closed with the following
sentence:--

  “Give my love to my dear boy, and tell him we are praying for him;
  and be assured, dear lady, when we pray for him, we will pray for
  you--that you may be kept safely through all the dangers of this
  cruel war.”

Frequent letters were sent by the mother, and I kept track of the boy
and answered them.

The last time I saw him was just before the close of the war. He was
well and strong, but was a prisoner in Camp Douglass, near Chicago,
Ill. I hope he reached his home and mother safely.




SEARCHING FOR THE DEAD.


A lady from Philadelphia searched for days over the wide battle-field
of Shiloh for the grave of her only child--a bright, beautiful,
Christian boy, only eighteen. A detail of men was sent from the
regiment to help search for the grave. She was quartered on our
Sanitary boat, and I went with her. “They are all buried side by
side--all we could find of our regiment,” said the sergeant who had
charge of the squad of men sent out to help us search. We scattered,
keeping in sight of each other, and in calling distance, and searched
thoroughly; but it was not till the second day that we found the grave.

The mother found it first of all. The name was written with a pencil
on a bit of board at the head. She gave a call, and waved her
handkerchief, and then fell on her knees, with her arms over the mound
of earth above her boy. He was all she had on earth; for he was the
only child of his mother, and she was a widow. As we gathered about
the grave, and saw her frail form convulsed by the sobs of agony she
tried to conceal, the roughest and bravest of the men turned away to
hide their tears. “He was a good soldier; a good Christian; we had few
like him in the regiment,” were the kindly comments that were made by
his companions in arms. As I lifted her away from the grave, her eyes,
though full of tears, caught sight of a passion flower at the edge of
the mound.

She plucked it and took it away as a keepsake, saying, “God is good to
give me this token of his own love and passion.” The body was to be
taken up and placed in the burial-case she had brought for the purpose.
They did not wish her to see it. Officers came and tried to dissuade
her. No, she must see him.

“No matter how mangled, I shall know him; and I must know that it is my
son.”

And she had her way. He was brought up; and when the blanket which was
his only coffin was unrolled, there he was as natural as life.

She clipped a few locks from his wealth of brown hair, and kneeling
by her dead, thanked God that he had given her back the body of her
son, and for the hope that animated her that they should meet again in
heaven. If by any possibility these lines should fall under the eyes of
that lady, whose name I have forgotten, she will recognize the story,
and I am sure she will be glad to renew the acquaintance with the
strange lady who helped her find her boy’s grave.




VERY TIMELY ARREST.


When the lines of battle were near Corinth, Miss., hearing of a
hospital at some little distance from the town, I determined to visit
it, taking supplies and delicacies with me. Two ladies accompanied me.
The driver of the ambulance, who assumed to know all about the roads,
and just where to find that hospital, and who had a splendid team of
horses, drove us off in good style.

After we had been _en route_ for some time, going at a rapid pace, I
questioned the driver, “Are you sure you are on the right road; it
seems to me we have come a long way?”

“Oh, yes; I know the road very well.”

“I wonder what those men are running after,” remarked one of the ladies
of the company.

It did really seem that men were springing up out of the ground. They
were running after us and waving their hands; but the steady, heavy
tramp of the feet of our horses drowned their voices; and we failed to
hear the oft-repeated command, “Halt!” “Halt!” which came from every
direction.

“Just look back! There are a lot of men on horseback coming at full
speed,” said one of the ladies.

It was only a moment before the foremost rider was near us, and he
thundered out in tones I shall never forget, “Halt!”

Our driver reined in his horses. “Turn your ambulance back as quickly
as you can, you fool! You are driving right into the enemy’s camp.”

The driver whipped up his horses and retreated at a gallop, but not
until the Confederate sharpshooters had begun to send their bullets
flying after the men who had come to our rescue. Some of the missiles
came dangerously near to the little ambulance company. The cans and
bundles which had been placed upon the seats with so much care, and
held with our outstretched hands, now went tumbling into a common heap
on the floor, and before the race was over two of us were down on top
of them. When we were at a safe distance from the enemy, the horsemen
riding near us, a halt was called, and we gathered ourselves up and
tried to look respectable after such a rough and tumble ride.

A captain rode round in front, and in a tone which made the cold
shivers creep along the spinal column, demanded, “Who is in charge of
this ambulance?”

“I am,” I answered with all the self-composure I could command at that
instant.

“And so you were trying to reach the lines of the enemy with supplies
and this good team and a Union soldier?”

“No, sir. I am as loyal as any man who wears shoulder-straps, and I can
prove it. I was trying to reach a hospital with these supplies [naming
the hospital]. The driver thought he knew the way, but it seems he did
not.”

“That is not a likely story. That hospital is not in that direction at
all; and I overtook you near the enemy’s camp, more than a mile beyond
where we allow any one to go. Why did you run past our pickets who
demanded you to halt?”

“I did not see any pickets, or hear any one call ‘Halt!’ until you came
up.”

“You are all under arrest! Driver, you will drive to the headquarters
of the commanding general.”

At these words my two lady friends turned very pale; but I laughed,
as I was acquainted with the commanding general. Remembering my pass
from the Secretary of War, and other important official papers in my
possession, I said to the captain who rode alongside of the ambulance,
“Would it make any change in your course if I should show you passes
from high officials? I have no objection to going to headquarters, but
it is a loss of time.”

“No, madam! You are all under arrest. The officers don’t give passes,
or send good teams and Union soldiers, to take people into the rebel
camps.”

It was of no use to say anything more, for the officer had told the
truth. In due time we reached headquarters and were ordered out. I led
the procession, clambering out over our scattered supplies as best I
could. The captain marched in beside me. The captain gave the military
salute, and was about to report that he had brought in these people,
captured while trying to run the Union lines; but there were several
officers there who knew me, who came forward to shake hands, and the
general among them, and he was silenced.

“Is there anything I can do for you to-day, madam?” the general
inquired in his most gracious manner.

“Yes, General, there is. I and this forlorn little company whom I have
led, and misled, are under arrest for a most serious crime. We were
on the enemy’s ground, and were pushing for the enemy’s camp at full
speed, when this gallant officer rode down in the face of the enemy and
rescued us. I want to thank him before you all.”

Of course further explanation was made, and we were all released. The
ambulance driver and myself were admonished “to make certain thereafter
that we were on the right road.” I shook hands with the captain and
thanked him, and the officers present congratulated him, and we all
left headquarters in high spirits.




SAVING THE LIFE OF YOUNG PIKE,

BROTHER OF MRS. SUE PIKE SANDERS, PAST NATIONAL PRESIDENT, W. R. C.


The atmosphere was thick with dust, and stifling with the sulphurous
smoke that came in clouds from the near battle-field, as I drove around
Vicksburg. The air was as hot as a furnace, under the pitiless rays of
a June sun, and vibrated with the roar and thunder of heavy artillery
and bursting shells, till every nerve was on the rack.

It was unusually late, and I was weary and heartsick.

But as I was on my way to my quarters, I noticed a soldier lying in a
field not far from the main travelled road. There was something in the
appearance of the man that attracted my attention, and I stopped my
carriage and went to him.

At first I thought he was dead; but a closer examination convinced me
that he was alive.

The shades of night were gathering around us, and the point where he
lay was one of unusual danger.

I hurried back to my carriage, and brought water and restoratives, and
began an earnest effort to resuscitate him.

It was not long till he opened his great brown eyes in a questioning
way.

“Poor boy!” I said in pitying tones; but he closed his eyes as though
he had not fully understood.

After a little he looked up into my face, and said in a whisper,--

“They left me here to die.”

“Oh, but you will be taken care of now, and you’ll get well. Don’t
think about dying--just think how soon you will be well again.”

He was a young soldier, not much if any over sixteen or eighteen years
old. He was lying there, with all his heavy army clothing on, in a most
pitiable condition.

There was a hospital not very far away; and leaving George, my driver,
to minister to him, I went up to the hospital and called for the
surgeon in charge.

“There is a soldier lying down here near the road who is nearly dead.
Will you not have him brought up, and see what you can do for him?” I
said.

“Why, isn’t he dead yet?” exclaimed an attendant.

I then learned that the regiment to which the young soldier belonged
had been ordered out to the Big Black River, and that all the sick
in their regimental hospital had been brought with them to that
point--there unloaded and reported to the hospital authorities. The
attendants had come down and taken all but this one man, and had left
him there to die alone. I was righteously indignant, and I denounced
the whole proceeding as _inhuman and scandalous_.

The surgeon and attendants were alarmed.

“Such carelessness on the part of the surgeon, and brutality on the
part of men charged with the care of the sick and wounded, were
disgraceful!” I declared.

It was not many minutes till the surgeon and attendants with a
stretcher were at his side.

Everything that could possibly be done for any one was done for him.

The surgeons had hard work to save him, however.

If I had passed him by unnoticed, they all agreed that he would have
been dead by the next morning.

Day after day as I drove about the lines I ministered to him till he
was out of danger.

Years passed before I had the privilege of seeing him again. Then he
was a great stalwart man, and bore the title of Hon. E. M. Pike, member
of the Senate of Illinois.

He is now living at Chenoa, Ill., has a lovely wife and two children,
a son and daughter full-grown. He has a large manufacturing
establishment there, and is beloved and honored by all who know him.

He has given good proof that he was well worth saving.




A VISIT FROM GENERAL GRANT AND GENERAL McPHERSON.


A few days after the surrender of Vicksburg, I called at General
Grant’s headquarters on business.

Generals McPherson and Rawlins were the only officials present with
him. I was received most cordially, and inquiries were made by General
Grant at once, as to whether the house he had assigned to me was
comfortable and satisfactory.

I assured him that it was, and spoke with great enthusiasm of the
colored servants left in charge of the property by the owners, who had
fled from Vicksburg before the siege. I was especially enthusiastic
about the cook.

“Why don’t you invite us up to test her cookery?” questioned General
McPherson. I hardly knew what to say, as I had made it a rule to shun
all appearances of social life.

“Oh, you would not come; you are all too busy paroling prisoners,” I
answered.

“Oh, yes! we would certainly come if you should invite us. Is not that
so, General Grant?”

“I shall certainly come if invited,” was General Grant’s reply.

“Then I most cordially invite you.”

“When shall we come?” questioned General McPherson.

“To-morrow, if that will suit you.”

That being satisfactory, they agreed to come the next day at one
o’clock, General Rawlins being included in the invitation, which he
laughingly said, “We have given ourselves.”

When I returned to my quarters that noon, and announced that General
Grant and two other generals were to dine with me the next day, there
was great consternation and excitement. I had tented with Mrs. General
Stone during the siege, and she had come into Vicksburg and occupied
the house with me. She was dismayed at the news. She declared that
there was not one decent tablecloth on the premises, that there were no
two napkins alike, or two dishes that matched. “The fact is,” she said,
“everything in this house mismatches. And how are you going to get them
into the dining-room with all the steps torn away? Are they to walk up
that inclined plane on the boards?”

I told her I did not know of any other way; but as we had to perform
that feat three times a day, I had no doubt they could get up from the
hall to the dining-room once. Aunt Dinah, the cook, who was at the head
of the colored members of the household, was enthusiastic.

“I tell you, honey, I’ll mak ebery ding shine, an’ I’ll hab de
tablecloth so slick a gnat’s heel would fly up on it.”

All the colored people were jubilant. It would be impossible to
describe their antics. The little children danced a jubilee; jumping up
and down, keeping up a chorus: “Ginnel Grant’s a-cummen! Ginnel Grant’s
a-cummen! Ginnel Grant’s de bigest ginnel of dem all!”

It was not an hour till every colored man, woman, and child in that
part of the town knew that at a certain hour the next day General Grant
was to be at that house. The colored men searched every sutler’s shop
for supplies, and Aunt Dinah did her best in the cooking line. The
next morning I went out among the hospitals as usual, but came home
before noon, so as to be there when my guests arrived. I found all the
neighboring fences about the grounds lined with colored people.

Mrs. Stone said to me as soon as I came in,--

“Now, you must not laugh or object, but Aunt Dinah has sent and got two
professional waiters; they are here now, dressed in broadcloth, with
swallow-tailed coats and white vests and white gloves.”

Of course I did laugh, and she laughed quite as heartily as myself,
at the incongruity of the arrangement. Here, in one of the deserted
houses of Vicksburg, that a shell had crashed through, making it
almost impossible to get into the dining-room, with nothing in the
way of table-outfit but the most ordinary camping utensils, we had
two professional waiters, rigged out in a style that could hardly be
matched at a state dinner at the presidential mansion, we were to
receive great generals. It was indeed laughable. Aunt Dinah felt she
ought to explain the matter to me.

“Honey, I want to ’splain ’bout dese ’fessional watahs. Our common
niggahs would never do to wait on fine gentlemen. You see, dey’s awkard
an’ hain’t got no good close. So I just hir’d dese fashionable watahs
case I wanted to have the thing done up right.”

Of course I made no objections. At the appointed hour, General Grant,
dressed in military uniform, riding his little black horse that had
carried him so often around the fiery lines of Vicksburg during the
siege, and General McPherson, dressed in elegant military fashion,
tall, stately, commanding, and splendidly mounted, rode up in front of
our house.

General Stone, who had commanded the extreme right during the siege,
and who had come up from his military camp to dine with us that day,
went out and hitched their horses, as there were no orderlies with them.

General Rawlins, who was prevented at the last moment from coming,
sent his regrets. Black faces were peeping out from the near houses,
and the fences were black with colored people. It was perhaps the one
chance of their lives to see their deliverer, the great captain who
had opened the prison-house of Vicksburg, and given liberty to all the
people.

Everything passed off very pleasantly. When dinner was announced,
taking the arm of General Grant, I led the way to the dining-room. Mrs.
General Stone took the arm of General McPherson, General Stone having
already gone into the dining-room to help us up. The stairs being
torn away, and the ascent being made on two planks that stood at an
angle of forty-five degrees, he reached down his hands and helped us
up. When the two great commanders reached the dining-room, they stood
for some time by the broken walls and stairs, and discussed shells as
destructive missiles, and speculated as to which battery sent that
shell crashing through the house. They finally decided that it came
from one of Admiral Porter’s gunboats.

The dinner followed, and was most thoroughly enjoyed. All the praise I
had given our cook she justified in that grandest effort of her life.

Aunt Dinah held the door a little ajar so that she could see and hear
all that was going on in the dining-room. She said to me afterwards,
with a satisfied chuckle, “Oh! Laws a massa, didn’t dey praise my
cooken! I never felt so big in my life. Seems to me I’se one of the
biggest cooks in the world.”

The professional waiters were skilled and graceful, even though a
napkin over a tin platter was used as a tray.

Aunt Dinah said very confidentially afterwards to me,--

“You see, honey, ’twould neber hab done to hab our niggahs done it.
T’ey’d been most scar’t to death, and sure to spill something. It
won’t do to hab common niggahs waten on high an’ mighty folks like big
ginnels.”

The guests enjoyed the dinner and the after visit. The siege; the
surrender; the terms of parole; the condition of the people who had
been shut up in the city during the siege; their life in the caves; the
condition of the hospitals; and “_what next?_” were freely discussed in
that frank and easy way that characterized General Grant when he was
surrounded by a group of friends he could trust.

When the two great generals took their leave, every colored person in
the neighborhood knew that the smaller man was General Grant, and they
were watching to get another glimpse of him. Both generals thanked
us for inviting them, and assured us that it was the most restful,
home-like visit they had enjoyed since the war began.

It was my privilege to dine with them on several occasions after
that, and to dine with General Grant at the White House during his
presidential terms; but there was not the enthusiasm and novelty on
those occasions that clustered around the dinner and visit in the
shell-wrecked house after the fall of Vicksburg.

General and Mrs. Stone live at their old home in Mount Pleasant, Iowa;
but the two great captains of the Union hosts are gone--McPherson
falling in the midst of the struggle on the bloody field of strife near
Atlanta, Ga., and Grant, after passing through untold perils, passing
peacefully away, and even in death immortalizing Mount McGregor.




LIBERTY HICKS.


As we were on our way to the brick church hospital, at Helena, Ark., a
very large man, with his hair curled and hanging over his shoulders,
passed us and looked back, my secretary and myself both imagined, in an
impudent way. When we reached the hospital we found him there. He put
himself in our way as though he wished to speak with us, but we both
avoided him. At last he came up and said to me, “Madam, I want to speak
with you; there is a man over here that the doctor thinks will die. I
thought maybe you’d come over and pray with him. I’ve been trying to
lead him to trust the Lord Jesus, but he don’t seem to find the way.”

How that great stalwart fellow was transfigured before us from a rowdy
to a saint. And as we went about the hospital everybody said, “If it
wasn’t for Liberty Hicks I don’t know what we would do.” It was not
long till a great cake of ice was floating about in the barrel of tepid
water that stood near the pulpit, and lemons from our supply were in
many a fever-parched hand. We found out afterwards that Liberty Hicks
was an Illinois soldier, and though big, coarse, and strong of body,
he was as tender in his ministrations as a woman, and as faithful as
tender. And although it was not our privilege to ever meet him again,
our good wishes have ever followed him.

Liberty Hicks was a grand hospital worker. I heard of his labors
afterwards, for he accompanied the sick up the river. But like many
others he overworked, and I learn from his daughter who lives near
him in Illinois that he is permanently disabled. It must, however, be
a great consolation to him now, in his old age, to know that by his
faithful services he saved many precious lives.




TRADING TOBACCO FOR COFFEE.


Governor Samuel J. Kirkwood and some of the state officials of Iowa
came down to visit the army during the siege of Vicksburg. I was
invited to go with the distinguished visitors on a tour of inspection,
as was also Mrs. General Stone.

Among the points of danger visited was the fortifications on the
“Extreme Right,” which was up above Vicksburg and down to the water’s
edge. The fortifications were so near together that the men could talk
back and forth.

Our boys had a printing-press and type, and there were men who could
write sensational news of the success of the Union army to order.

They would buy a St. Louis paper, and then get out an “Extra.”

  “SURRENDER OF LEE--CAPTURE OF JEFF. DAVIS--RICHMOND TAKEN.”

The particulars of all these events would be given in the most
plausible and convincing manner.

A stone was tied to the papers, and some wag would call out,--

“Say, Rebs, do you want the latest news? Newspapers are just in from
St. Louis. The war is over.”

“Yes, throw them over;” and over they would go.

But the Confederates would not believe a word unless it was favorable
to their cause, and they laughed loud and long over the “lies of the
Yanks.” But they kept it up on the principle that “everything is fair
in war.”

“Put up your head above the embankment, and you will soon see whether
the war is over or not,” the soldiers on the other side would say. On
that day, while we stood there, some of the Iowa officials put their
hats on their canes, and had them perforated by bullets.

A voice came over the ramparts, “Say, Yanks, do you want some tobacker?”

“Yes.”

“Will you trade coffee for tobacker?”

“Yes; throw it over, and we will throw over enough coffee to pay for
it.”

We waited in expectation a little while, then a warning came,--

“Look out there, Yanks!”

All stepped back out of danger. A cloth that had once been white, but
had evidently been in the trenches, came over filled with a lot of the
most abominable tobacco I had ever seen.

After due inspection, the cloth was shaken a few times and filled with
coffee, and a warning cry given,--

“Look out, Rebs!” and over the coffee went.

“All right; thanks;” and the firing was resumed.

There was, I learned afterwards, trading all along the lines.




THE HOSPITALS OF VICKSBURG AT THE TIME OF THE SURRENDER.


Early on the morning of the 5th of July, the roadways being opened,
I drove into Vicksburg. On every side the evidences of the severe
struggle were visible. The concentrated fire of shot and shell had
riddled nearly every building.

The solid shot had done much less damage than the shells, which, after
striking, usually exploded. The solid cannon-balls cut clean round
holes in the solid brick walls, with less damage to the walls in most
cases than could have been done by a mason’s chisel. But the murderous
shot and shell had come from every direction, and scattered the
household goods and the inmates, killing many citizens and soldiers,
and wounding many more. The whole city was an immense hospital.

And it is but kindly and fair to say, just here, that no city was
ever more heroically defended; and that the gallant force inside of
Vicksburg did not yield until starvation stared them in the face. There
was nothing to eat in the city. The soldiers had been on short rations
for a long time; the citizens were without food. Cattle, horses, mules,
dogs, cats, rats, and mice had been devoured. The sick and wounded in
the hospitals had been sustained on mule soup for a long while, and the
supply of mules was about exhausted. There was no living creature in
the shape of dogs and cats and rats to be seen in the streets or about
the houses--all had been eaten for food.

The United States government issued rations to the starving people at
once. I visited the hospitals immediately. I had large supplies of
hospital stores, which were sent to me by Mr. Yeateman of St. Louis,
President of the Western Sanitary Commission, who was a Southern
gentleman, and who, though loyal to the Stars and Stripes, yet felt
deep sympathy for the Southerners in their terrible sufferings; and
also from Louisville and elsewhere, for I, too, was linked by ties
of blood to the people of the South, and the history of Kentucky was
interlinked with the history of my ancestors.

These immense supplies were sent me, in anticipation of the surrender,
for the Confederate Hospital of Vicksburg. Some of the hospitals were
in a most wretched condition; the men being without beds or pillows, or
any other comforts for the sick. This was especially true of what were
called the “field hospitals;” the hospitals immediately in the rear of
the fighting force, into which the wounded were carried before being
transported to the permanent hospitals.

In these hospitals I found men lying on the floor with their knapsacks
under their heads, sweltering in their heavy army clothing. We found
afterwards that their clothing was full of vermin. One poor man who
looked very ill, and seemed to be suffering much, lay on the floor of
one of the first hospitals I visited. I stopped to speak with him,
coming close beside him. A Confederate surgeon sprang forward, and,
taking me by the arm, said, “Please, lady, don’t go so near, you are
in danger of getting vermin on you.” I had the satisfaction within the
next twenty-four hours of seeing that hospital thoroughly cleansed, and
every soldier lying clean and comfortable in a cot-bed between clean
sheets, and his head resting on a soft white pillow; while a bonfire
just in the rear of the building was consuming all the old clothing
and former contents of the hospital. The Confederate surgeons were
retained in the hospitals where the Union army found them, and many of
them were faithful, gentlemanly men. I remember very kindly the medical
director, or chief surgeon, of Pemberton’s army, although I have
forgotten his name. He seemed very anxious to improve the condition of
the hospitals, and was very grateful for help and supplies. The wounded
were lying on the floor because there were no beds for them; they were
starving--dying for lack of proper nourishment because there was
little or no food for them, and so the hospitals were necessarily in a
wretched state.

The hospitals in the centre of the city were in better condition. There
were many incidents connected with my visits to these hospitals which I
should be glad to record, but space will not allow.




A VISIT TO CAPTAIN WALKE’S GUNBOAT.


Among the gallant Union officers who distinguished themselves for
wisdom and bravery was Captain Walke, commander of the _Carondelet_.
I knew him personally as a benevolent Christian gentleman. No one who
knew him doubted his profession of faith in the Divine Redeemer.

While his gunboat was lying at Cairo, just before the battle of Fort
Donelson, he came into the church one Sabbath morning and quietly took
a seat. The minister who was expected disappointed the audience.

As soon as that was made known, Captain Walke arose and went into
the pulpit, opened the Bible, and saying, “Let us worship God,” read
the One Hundred and Third Psalm. Closing the book, he talked most
impressively of our duty to God and to man, and of the boundless,
measureless love of Christ, and, offering an earnest prayer, dismissed
the congregation with the long-metre doxology.

The people, who had been held with almost breathless interest by the
eloquent, forceful words of the stranger, began to ask, “Who is he?”
And great was their surprise when they learned that the man who filled
the pulpit that day was Captain Walke, commander of the _Carondelet_,
an iron-clad that with bristling cannon was lying at anchor near the
town.

It was at Cairo that I first met Captain Walke. As he was often at
the chief ports where the army was protected by gunboats, I had the
privilege of meeting him occasionally.

Two days before the running of the blockade at Vicksburg, a little
company of us went over from the Sanitary boat to bid Captain Walke
godspeed and farewell.

He had just completed the task of pouring two barrels of coal-oil over
his gunboat, and whitewashing the lower deck, where the guns were to be
loaded by the light of the whitewash.

The oil was to prevent solid shot from adhering; striking a smooth
oiled surface they would be more likely to fly off on a tangent, he
explained by way of apology, as the gangway was reached, and the
dresses of the ladies were besmeared with coal-oil. The sides of
the _Carondelet_ were more than three feet thick, and consisted of
alternate layers of wood and iron.

In answer to the question,--

“Is not the eve of a battle a season of great anxiety?” he said,--

“No; the time of anxiety with me is when I am putting the ship in
order. When I have done all that I can do, then I can serenely trust in
God.”

In the course of the conversation, he said that the most beautiful
sight he had ever seen was the bursting of shells against the side of
his ship, sending out volumes of fire, and scintillations of light like
a cloud of glory.

Our godspeeds and good wishes were earnest and heartfelt. We all felt
that it might be a last farewell.

He went through the fiery channel in safety, but I never saw his face
again.

His death occurred not a great while thereafter.

A grand, true Christian gentleman, and a brave soldier, was Captain
Walke.




HOSPITAL ABUSES--PUTTING LOGWOOD IN THE COFFEE.


There was a very large hospital at Madison, Ind., which was very
much crowded in 1864-1865 with the sick and wounded. I established a
special-diet kitchen there for the preparation of food for the very
sick and the severely wounded, and placed one of my lady helpers in
charge. She had scarcely assumed the supervision of the cookery till
she began complaining of the quality of the food, especially of the
coffee. As she put it: “There is nothing in this hospital fit for a
well man to eat, much less these sick and wounded and dying men.”

I was in Washington at the time; but I telegraphed to Miss Louisa
Vance, one of the shrewdest and most careful workers of the Christian
Commission, to report at the hospital at Madison, Ind., and await
instructions. I met her there with carefully written instructions: “Go
on with the work, and don’t complain, but watch. There is something
wrong in that hospital; _find out what it is_. The government furnishes
good supplies and good coffee; find out what becomes of them, but
don’t, for the life of these men, let the surgeon and hospital steward
know that they are suspected. Make frequent errands to the room of the
commissary,” etc. She was not long in finding out as to the cheating
and adulteration. The first clew was obtained because of the rule in
that hospital, that a barrel be placed beside the kitchen door, and all
the coffee-grounds emptied into it. “Boys,” she said to some of the men
who did the cooking, “why do you put the coffee-grounds there? They
have been used; they are no account.”

“It’s the surgeon’s orders.”

“He has them hauled away and emptied, I suppose?”

“No; he has them dried on the commissary floor.”

“Gives them to poor people, I suppose?”

“I don’t know,” answered one; but there was a general laugh among the
men in the kitchen.

She made an excuse to go to the commissary-room; and there, sure
enough, on the floor, was a large pile of old coffee-grounds. The men
employed there were busy stirring and turning it over to hasten the
drying process. She asked for something in a careless way, and then
said as she was leaving,--

“You have a good lot of coffee, boys. What in the world are you going
to do with so much coffee?”

“The surgeon in charge is going to sell it, I guess;” and then they
all laughed. She felt sure from their manner that these men knew all
the secrets of that commissary department, and it must be her business
to get it from them. But I was urging her to be careful; for if false
charges were brought against the surgeon in charge of a large hospital,
it would injure the diet-kitchen service all along the line. We were
in daily correspondence. She had tested the coffee every way she could
think of, but could not decide as to how it was adulterated. She had a
new white-pine sink put in the kitchen, and poured out some coffee on
that. It stained the boards logwood color. She knew now at least _one_
article of adulteration. She looked the men of the commissary well
over, and picked out one, an innocent young fellow, that she thought
she might surprise into a confession. Waiting her chance, when no one
was near, she faced him with the terrible question:--

“Why do you men in the commissary-room put logwood and every other vile
stuff in the coffee for our poor sick and wounded men to drink? Have
you no conscience? Do you want to kill them?”

The poor boy turned pale, and staggered back as though he would fall,
as he stammered,--

“We have to do it; it’s the surgeon’s orders. Indeed, Miss Vance, we
can’t help it;” and he dashed away as fast as he could go, to tell the
others.

“O boys! Miss Vance knows all about the cheating here, and the logwood
and everything in the coffee.”

As they wanted to set themselves right with Miss Vance, the others, as
soon as they could, went to her to apologize, and to assure her that
it was orders. She assumed not to believe that a surgeon would give
such orders, and said she could not believe till she saw the orders.
They brought them, and also the surgeon’s instructions for mixing, and
various other devices for cheating.

“Now, boys, don’t say a word about this till I can see what I can do.”

Of course I got all these facts as quick as the mail could bring them.
I wrote her “to be careful, to make copies of all the papers and
records of the false entries in the books, and take these men one by
one to a justice of the peace or notary public, and have them swear to
everything;” for, if the surgeon should suspect what she was doing, he
would at once relieve them, and order them to join their regiments,
and she would be left to stand alone. I started for Louisville, Ky.,
the headquarters of Assistant Surgeon-General R. C. Wood, at once, and
requested Miss Vance to send to me there all the papers in the case,
which she did.

As I read over the villanous record of cheatery, and the disgusting
compounds he had put into the old coffee-grounds for the poor sick
and wounded men to drink, my soul was hot within me with righteous
indignation. When I went into the office of General Wood the next
morning I was in a mood for strong talk. He gave me his usual cordial
greeting.

“General Wood, if you please, I would like to see you alone,” I said.

He looked surprised, as I had never made such a request before.

“Certainly,” he said, and nodded to the two or three clerks in the room
to withdraw. As soon as the door was closed behind them I began:--

“I came to report Dr. R----, of the Madison Hospital.”

“Dr. R----? Why, he is one of my best surgeons! What has he done?”

“You may think he is one of your best surgeons, but my opinion of him
is that _he ought to be hung higher than Haman_.”

The general looked greatly surprised, as he had never heard me use any
such emphatic terms about any one before. “Please, madam, explain,” he
said.

“He is cheating and starving the soldiers, and selling their good
coffee, and giving them a little coffee mixed with logwood and other
vile adulteration.”

“Impossible! That is entirely impossible.”

“Nevertheless, it is true; and he is _cheating you_ in making up his
hospital returns. I have the proof here in my hands.”

He turned pale. “Can such a thing be possible?” he gasped.

“It is possible,” I said. “See for yourself;” and I handed him the true
returns, with the affidavits.

He brought out the official returns which had been sent by the surgeon,
and we compared them.

“He’s a villain, a heartless villain,” the general would mutter at each
new exhibition of the surgeon’s rascality.

When we had gone through with the papers, he said in a most emphatic
way,--

“I will punish that man to the full extent of the law.”

“No, general: he will elude you; he will find some way to escape. If
dealt with by military law he will escape; but I have a plan that will
reach him.”

“What is your plan?”

“To go to Governor Morton of Indiana, and lay the facts and these
papers before him, and put the whole case in his hands. The hospital
is in his State, and I don’t think he can get out of the clutches of
Governor Morton.” My words were like the shock of an electric battery.
He sprang to his feet, and walked the floor in a most excited state
of mind. At last he calmed himself enough to speak, and facing me, he
said,--

“Madam, do you wish to kill me? Do you wish to kill me? Do you wish to
stab me to the heart?”

“Certainly not. I have the highest respect for you. I believe you are
innocent in this matter; but I do not want that villain to escape.”

“_He shall not escape._”

“What will you do?”

“I will send up Inspector Allen right away.”

“No; that won’t do. Inspector Allen has been going up month after
month, and has not seen a thing wrong. No; I am sorry to say it, but I
do not believe you can bring this man to justice. Governor Morton is my
only chance to secure that.”

I shall never forget with what majesty he stood before me. He looked
like a patriarch,--tall, straight, commanding, with his crown of gray
hair, his fair and kindly face. _A perfect Christian gentleman_ of the
old school, too honest and true himself to suspect others as frauds.

“Mrs. Wittenmyer,” he said, “you could not possibly do me a greater
injury; such a thing would likely lead to my removal. You certainly
do not desire that. Have I not co-operated with you in all your
great plans, removing from one hospital to another surgeons at your
suggestion? Have I not placed steamers and trains to carry your goods,
and extended to you the hearty co-operation and aid of this office? Why
should you wish to injure me?”

“I do not wish to injure you. I only want to bring this rogue to
justice. You have done _all_ that any one could do for me, and the
influence of your high office has helped me all along the lines. I
shall ever hold you in grateful remembrance for your kindness and
co-operation; but I cannot stand by and see our sick and wounded men
treated in this way, and not do my utmost to bring such a rascal to
justice.”

“He shall be brought to justice. I will make this proposition to you:
I will appoint a commission to investigate, bring charges against and
court-martial him, and you may select the commission.”

“But he will resign as soon as he knows they are going to bring
charges.”

“I will not accept his resignation.”

And so this plan was agreed to; as over the opposition of the assistant
surgeon-general, who had been my ablest helper, I saw it would not do
to go, as I wished to do, to Governor Morton.

I selected Dr. Clendening, medical director of that department, as the
president of the court. I knew him to be a true gentleman, of sterling
integrity, who would do his duty without fear or favor. The others were
among the best medical men of the army.

The last I heard of Dr. Clendening he was in the regular army, and
stationed at St. Louis. I think he is still living, as are most of
those who are familiar with the facts here recorded. The commission
received the documents, went to Madison, and verified all Miss Vance’s
statements, and sat down together to formulate the charges. But as soon
as the committee came on the ground, Surgeon R---- telegraphed his
resignation to Surgeon-General Barnes at Washington. It was accepted
by telegraph, and he was on a train far away. The commission was
greatly disappointed, and General Wood was very much humiliated over
the affair. Shortly afterwards, returning to Washington, I spoke to the
surgeon-general about the case, and gave him my views about Dr. R----’s
rascality. But the hospital was soon cleaned up; the old coffee-grounds
and logwood were dumped out upon the “common,” and good food and plenty
of it was served to the men.

I was not known to Dr. R---- in the case; but Dr. Clendening and the
other members of the commission, and Miss Vance, will know how the
reform was brought about. I do not give the full name of the surgeon,
as he may have repented in sackcloth and ashes for aught I know; but
there is little danger of my forgetting his name. Miss Vance is now
living in California.




REMINISCENCE OF GENERAL GRANT.


One of the strongest evidences of General Grant’s nobility of character
was his respectful treatment of the men in the ranks. They were all
men, and were treated as men. He did not toady to the officers, or
bully the privates. His attitude to all was respectful and considerate.

He was more approachable to the men in the ranks than were many of his
inferior officers.

An ambulance driver at City Point told me this story:--

“The road was narrow, and I was allowing the horses to jog on at a slow
pace, when an officer rode up and said, ‘Drive your ambulance to one
side, please, and allow my staff to pass.’

“I was paralyzed when I looked up and saw it was General Grant who
was talking to me so nice and polite. I looked back and saw a lot of
officers coming, and you may be sure I got out of their way as quick as
I could. Most officers would have sworn a blue streak because I was in
the road, but that isn’t General Grant’s way; he is a mighty nice man.”

I had occasion to call at an officer’s headquarters to report that
there were supplies at the landing for his regiment. He was very much
pleased that I had taken the trouble to call on him personally, as
he was from my own State. As we sat in his tent talking socially, a
private soldier came to the tent-door, made the military salute, and
was about to speak, when the colonel thundered his words of command:--

“Begone; what business have you coming to my headquarters?”

“The lieutenant sent me to”--

“Begone, I tell you.”

The soldier turned away deeply humiliated, and no doubt indignant. I,
as indignant as the soldier, arose, and without ceremony left the tent.
I have never thought of that officer since, that I did not want to go
back to that lost opportunity, and tell him how mean and ignoble he
was.




FRED D. GRANT--THE BRAVE ORDERLY AT VICKSBURG.


Nearly every day during the siege of Vicksburg, General Grant rode
around the fiery line of the besieged city on his little black horse;
and his son Fred, about thirteen years old, who acted as his orderly,
followed about fifty yards in the rear.

It was a wild ride over the rough, roadless fields and bluffs in the
rear of our batteries, where the enemy’s guns were ploughing the ground
here and there, over which they were riding.

Almost every day, as I drove about the lines, at some point or other
I would see General Grant and his brave little orderly riding at full
speed in the face of the long lines of the enemy’s batteries, and
within range of their murderous fire. But most of all to be feared was
the surer fire of the Confederate sharpshooters.

They were never within speaking distance, being much nearer the
batteries than was the roadway along which I drove.

There was great anxiety for General Grant during the siege. Personally
he was beloved by officers and men, but there were deeper reasons. His
life was so important to the Union cause, that his death would have
been the greatest calamity that the army could have suffered. Officers
and civilians warned and entreated him, but as far as I could see he
made no change in his course.

Fred Grant shared his father’s dangers; and although he was one of the
nicest boys I ever saw, few knew his real merits and bravery. Like
his distinguished father, he was free from bombast, and was quiet and
reserved, so his heroic services during the siege were not paraded
before the public, as the deeds of many who did not show half the
courage he did.

We did not meet very often; but when we did, I always had some kindly
words and an approving smile for him. It was fortunate that his devoted
mother was not there at that time to see his danger as he went out
under the guns daily.

Her anxiety would have been unbearable, as she was a most devoted wife
and mother, and the dangers were appalling.

Fred D. Grant ought in some marked way to receive public honor for his
wonderful heroism at Vicksburg.




THE SAD FATE OF JENNIE WADE.


One of the many sad incidents of the battle of Gettysburg was the
tragic death of Jennie Wade. The family remained in their house, as
they could not well leave a married daughter lying on her bed with a
new-born infant by her side. Jennie and her mother remained with her,
as there seemed to be no way of removing Mrs. McClelland and her baby
to a place of safety when the coming of the two armies disturbed the
quiet of the quaint old Pennsylvania town of Gettysburg. Amid the clash
of arms, when the boom of cannon shook the rock-rimmed hills and echoed
among the mountains, and the shock of battle sent a throb of agony
along the lines of two armies, they were there in the midst of it all.
Mrs. McClelland lay there helpless amid its thunders, while Jennie made
bread for the soldiers who crawled to the door begging for something to
eat.

A shell came crashing through the house, and cut off one of the posts
of the bedstead on which Mrs. McClelland and her infant were lying, but
neither was injured.

The mother and sister took a big rocking-chair down into the cellar,
and carried her down and placed her in it with her baby, and Jennie
went on making bread for the famishing soldiers.

Another shell came screaming into the house; and Jennie, with her hands
just out of the dough, lay dead. The mother, bending over her, searched
in vain for some token of life, but the pulse had ceased to beat; her
loyal heart was forever still.

The battle was now raging in all its wild fury; but the heroic mother,
instead of flying to the cellar for safety, took up Jennie’s work, and
with Jennie lying dead at her feet, went on with the bread-making till
the battle closed.

Jennie Wade had always been planning for her burial. A complete
burial-suit was in the house. But after the battle was over, the safety
of the army made it imperative that the dead, lying bloated on the
battle-field under a scorching July sun, should be buried at once. A
squad of stalwart men, grim with the dust and smoke of battle, took
Jennie Wade up tenderly, wrapped a flag about her, completely covering
her soiled calico gown and her hands all covered with dough, and
carried her uncoffined to her grave. But many a soldier who was fed at
her hands, and all who have heard the pathetic story, will pause where
Jennie Wade lies sleeping to pay her the honor due a heroine of the war.

The mother still lives in Gettysburg; but the surviving daughter, Mrs.
McClelland, with her soldier husband, who was on another battle-field
at the time of her peril at Gettysburg, is now living near Tacoma,
Wash. She has from the first been an active and valuable worker of the
Woman’s Relief Corps.




THE HOSPITAL AT POINT OF ROCKS, VA.


When the Union army was massed at City Point in the desperate struggle
to capture Petersburg and Richmond, it became necessary to establish a
large hospital at Point of Rocks, a few miles above City Point.

Log cabins, put up from timber green from the forest, and tents, served
as quarters for the sick and wounded; and three or four thousand of
the worst cases were quartered there almost immediately, being soon
increased to five thousand. The army operating against Richmond was
only a few miles away, and the thunder of their guns could be heard all
day long, and the night sky was often illuminated by bursting shells;
for two armies were facing each other between Point of Rocks and
Richmond, and occasionally a shell would come screaming over to remind
us that we were in range of the enemy’s guns. The cooking arrangements,
when I reached Point of Rocks, were of the most primitive character.
Two log cabins without floors or chimneys, with openings in the roof
to allow the smoke to escape, and big kettles hanging over smoking,
crackling log fires, were used for cooking purposes. There were great
black iron kettles for coffee, tea, soups, meat, beans, and rice.

When I saw the messes served to the sick and wounded men in the wards,
as each cabin was called, I did not wonder that the men turned away in
disgust.

The tin cups, in which the patients received their tea and coffee,
were black and battered; the platters had been used in many a march,
and were rusty and greasy. Into each one of these platters was dished
out rice, beans, or mixed vegetables, as the men preferred. My mental
comment was, “There is not one thing here fit for a well man to eat,
much less a sick or wounded man.” The surgeon in charge seemed not
to know that things were not up to the proper standard; and I was
silent--silent till I was out of the hearing of these men, and until I
had a chance to say all that was in my heart to say. The office of the
surgeon in charge was in a frame dwelling on the grounds. When I had
seated myself in his office, he turned suddenly upon me and questioned,
“Well, what do you think of my hospital?”

“Perhaps you would not like to hear; you may wish only flattery,” I
answered very kindly.

“Yes; I want to know the truth. If you see anything that can be
improved just say so frankly; but you must remember we are under the
enemy’s guns, and can’t have the conveniences and luxuries that they
have in the big cities.”

“I will not suggest anything that cannot be accomplished here within
a week, and yet it would be a great change for the men. I would begin
with the kitchen. I would build a kitchen with a chimney; there are
plenty of rocks here.”

“Yes, that is so.”

“Then, I would have a floor in it, and two of the largest ranges the
market affords.”

“That is impossible; the government would not supply ranges.”

“I will supply the ranges. The Christian Commission is ready at an
hour’s notice to honor any order that I am likely to give.”

“The men couldn’t manage them.”

“No, perhaps not; but I would put in two first-class women to do the
managing, and the men you have could do the work.”

After very much more talk, he suggested that I might make the attempt.

I wrote immediately to George H. Stuart of Philadelphia, President of
the Christian Commission, stating the condition of affairs at the Point
of Rocks Hospital, requesting lumber for kitchen, lime for chimney,
two first-class ranges, a thousand tin cups and platters, and all the
necessary supplies to start a kitchen.

My letter was promptly received, and Mr. Stuart answered by telegram:--

  “Everything ordered will be sent this afternoon. Also crates of
  dishes. Go ahead. You shall have all you need.”

I had already telegraphed to Mrs. E. W. Jones, one of my most reliable
workers, to come to me immediately, and Miss Hattie Noyes, another
superior worker.

They both came as fast as steam could bring them, reaching there before
the kitchen was completed. A cabin had been prepared for them; but as
shingles were not at hand, it was covered with canvas. As the ladies
were entirely competent to complete the arrangements, I left them for
another point. In less than a week a most remarkable change had been
wrought in that hospital. When the first meals were issued from that
well-regulated kitchen in the nice white dishes and bright tinware, the
sick men, many of them, cried and kissed the dishes, and said it seemed
most like getting home. Instead of the slops dished out of vessels that
looked like swill-buckets, there came to the beds of the very sick
and severely wounded, baked potatoes, baked apples, beef-tea, broiled
beefsteak (when allowed), and especially to the wounded, toasts,
jellies, good soup, and everything in the best home-like preparation.

The surgeon looked on in utter surprise. But the patients fared
better than my heroic women. There came a beating, driving rain, and
their canvas roof leaked like a sieve. They wrapped rubber blankets
about their clothing, put rubber blankets on their bed, raised their
umbrellas, and slept. Of this trial Mrs. Jones wrote me. I quote from
her letter:--

  “This has been a trying day. All night and all day the rain has
  come down in torrents in our quarters and the kitchen, as well as
  out-of-doors. Quarts of water ran off our bed while we slept. Almost
  everything had to be dried, even to bed and bedding, and in the
  kitchen it was even worse. But to-night finds us in good spirits, and
  our zeal undampened, though our work has been most thoroughly soaked.

                                          Affectionately,
                                                               E. W. J.”

The putting on of new roofs was only a question of a day or two, and
they had no more trouble from rain after that.

This hospital became so large that another kitchen had to be
established, and three other ladies were added to the force.

These kitchens were the most important in the entire service, except,
possibly, the great kitchen at Cumberland Hospital, Nashville, Tenn.
The fame of the cookery there extended all along the line. Surgeons
came long distances to see for themselves if the reports were true
about them. To many it seemed incredible that the cooking for the very
sick could be so well managed right along the front lines in these
field hospitals.

At my request. General Grant, commanding the United States forces with
headquarters at City Point, visited these famous kitchens.

Himself and two of his staff went in disguise.

With his slouch hat drawn down, and coming in citizen’s clothing, no
one noticed him. They stood by the door of the largest kitchen, while
the dinner was issued. He asked, when the food had been sent out, a few
questions and looked at the bill of fare, then followed to the wards to
see the patients receive it.

He said, when I next came down from Washington and called at
headquarters, that he thought it was the most wonderful thing he had
ever seen. He was unusually enthusiastic.

“Why,” said he, “those men live better than I do; and so many of them
too. How they manage to cook such a variety for so many hundreds is
what puzzles me.”

Then he told me about his going through the wards while they were
taking their dinner, and noticing how greatly they enjoyed the food.
And when _told_ THAT THE MOST OF THIS FOOD CAME FROM THE COMMUTATION OF
GOVERNMENT RATIONS, he was still more surprised.

When he was passing through one of the wards, a convalescing soldier,
taking him to be a delegate of the Christian Commission, called out,
“Say, Christian, won’t you bring me a pair of socks?”

“I’ll see that you get a pair,” the general responded, and passed out;
but he arranged to have the man get a pair of socks.

But where are the noble women who labored there with so much energy and
zeal years ago?

Mrs. Jones, a most saintly woman, the widow of a Presbyterian minister,
sits serene in the evening of life--her work done and well-done--at
Wellesley, Mass., where her daughter is the attending physician of the
college.

All the years of her life have been given to benevolent and reform
work, and now she waits and listens for the heavenly voice and the
rustle of the angel’s wings.

Miss Noyes is in Canton, China, where she has been in mission work ever
since the close of the war. A few years ago a beautiful poem written
by her, entitled, “Toiling All Night,” was extensively published
in this country. She has several times returned on a visit to her
native land, and was, when she came to us, the same bright, cheerful,
earnest-hearted woman, as when, amid the thunders of battle, she
ministered to the sick and wounded soldiers of the Republic.

Fortune has not dealt generously with some of the others who labored
there. One, a competent worker, is now poor. She lives in Illinois.

Another married and settled on a land claim. Her husband died from
overwork and exposure, leaving her in the wilderness, without help
to bury him, for days. After he was laid away, she struggled on,
determined to hold the claim; but a fearful snowstorm one winter came,
and buried her and her two little girls under the snow, till the top of
the house was level with the plain.

They remained buried for many days before being dug out. Some men
thought about her, and travelled miles to ascertain if she was all
right.

They searched long before they could find her shanty, and when they
did, had to dig tons of snow away before they could get her out. She
now lives in Colorado.

These years have wrought great changes; but all the workers will look
back, no matter how bright or how dark the hours that may come to them,
with great satisfaction on their heroic work at Point of Rocks, Va.




THE SWEET SINGER OF THE HOSPITALS.


In the fall of 1864, when the Union army was massing against Richmond,
Va., the hospitals in and around Washington were very much overcrowded.

Under special orders from Mr. Stanton, Secretary of War, and with the
hearty co-operation of President Lincoln, I had previously assumed the
general supervision of the special-diet kitchens of the United States
army hospitals all along the lines.

It also devolved upon me to select the lady superintendents for that
important service, two for each kitchen. The food for the very sick
and the severely wounded, on orders of the ward surgeons, was prepared
under their supervision.

In some of these special-diet kitchens as many as 1,000, and in some
1,500 patients, were supplied with carefully prepared food in great
variety three times a day.

It will be readily seen that competent women were needed to take the
management of this important work. They had not only to command
a force of twenty or thirty men in these kitchens, and maintain
discipline and good order, but they had, under hospital authority, the
entire responsibility of supplying the proper preparation of food, on
time and without the least delay or confusion.

Their high position also demanded that they should be ladies of culture
and social standing, who could command the respect and confidence of
officers and surgeons in charge. It is greatly to the honor of the
patriotic women of the North, that scores of accomplished ladies of
high social position volunteered to fill these important places.

Great care had to be taken in their selection, and none were accepted
unless highly indorsed.

One day there came to my headquarters in Washington a young lady from
Pawtucket, R.I. She was twenty-two years old, as I afterwards learned;
but she was so childlike in appearance that she seemed much younger.

“I am Lizzie B----,” she said by way of introduction. “I was ready and
waiting, and just as soon as I received your letter containing pass and
orders to come, I started.”

My heart sank within me. I was expecting Lizzie B----, but I had
anticipated meeting a very different-looking person.

Every letter of recommendation had said: “Although Miss B---- is young
in years, she is mature in character, and is of the highest type of
American womanhood, and will command respect anywhere. We commend her
to you as one of our noblest women, who will be equal to any position,
and one who will never fail nor falter in the line of duty.”

I had naturally expected a woman of stately and commanding presence,
and one who would be equal to any emergency; but she seemed to me to be
only a child in years and experience.

“I have ordered up my baggage,” she said with childlike simplicity,
“and I have brought my little melodeon with me. I thought it might be
useful.”

Sure enough, when her luggage came, and the box containing the
instrument was opened, she took out the smallest melodeon I ever saw.

“What shall I do with that dear little child from Rhode Island and her
little melodeon?” I said to my secretary, Mary Shelton, now Mrs. Judge
Houston of Burlington, Iowa. But she could not solve the problem.

When the heavy work of the day was through, weary and full of care and
anxiety, we joined Miss B---- in the parlor. After some conversation,
she said,--

“Would you like to have me play and sing?”

We assented, and she sat down at the instrument and began to play and
sing.

We were amazed and charmed. It seemed as though the curtains of heaven
were lifted, and the songs of an angel were floating down upon us.

The tones of the little melodeon were soft and clear, and the voice of
the singer was sweet and remarkably sympathetic. Her notes thrilled
one; there was life and spirit in them. After listening to her for an
hour or more, weariness and anxiety were gone, and _I knew just what to
do with Lizzie B----_.

There were tens of thousands of aching and burdened hearts all about
us; and she, with her wonderful gift of song, could lift some drooping
spirit, and pour the balm of peace into some wounded, fainting hearts.
I took her and her melodeon to Campbell Hospital the next morning, and
told her to sing as she had opportunity.

The sick and wounded were quartered in great wooden barracks eighty
feet long. There were rows of cots on either side of the room. That
very day she went into one of these wards. She had never been in a
hospital before; and when she entered and saw the long rows of cots,
and all the faces of the men, whether they were lying down or sitting
up, turned towards her, she grew faint and dizzy, and her courage
almost failed her. She seemed powerless to do anything but to walk on
down the long aisle.

At last a soldier called to her from his bed,--

“Say, miss, won’t you write a letter for me?”

It was a great relief to have the oppressive silence broken and to have
something to do. As she sat down beside his cot, she asked,--

“To whom shall I write?”

“My mother.”

And he thrust his hand down under his pillow, and drew forth a letter
which she read with tears.

“What shall I say to her?”

“Tell her that the surgeons think that I may live a week or two yet.”

“Oh! but you may get well.”

“No; I can never recover. I have a fatal disease.”

“Shall I ask your mother to come to you?”

“No; she cannot come. She is too poor, and she can’t leave the younger
children; but she is praying for me.”

“Would you like to have me to pray for you?”

“Yes, miss, if you will.”

Lizzie B---- took one of his thin, cold hands in her own and knelt
beside his cot, and offered up one of those low, sweet, sympathetic
prayers that come from the heart and ascend straight to the throne of
mercy.

When she arose, every man who could leave his bed was standing about
the cot, and many were wiping away the tears they could not restrain.

“Would you like to have me sing something?” she questioned, looking
kindly into their faces.

“Oh! do--please do,” they all urged; and she sang one of the sweet
songs of the gospel that she could sing so well.

Of course they were all delighted, and begged that she would come
again.

“I have a melodeon,” she said, as she left them; “and I’ll come
to-morrow and have that brought into the ward, if the surgeon says I
may.”

As they looked wistfully after her, one of the soldiers, wiping the
tears from his eyes, said,--

“She looks like a woman, but she sings like an angel.”

The next day the little melodeon was carried into that ward, and Lizzie
B---- sang for them, and the surgeon in charge was one of the auditors.
He was so delighted with the influence of her singing, that he gave
orders that she be allowed to sing in all the wards of that hospital.

From that time on, she devoted her time to the service of song, till
all the hundreds in that hospital had been cheered again and again by
her tender words and sweet, sympathetic voice.

The effects of her singing were so uplifting and comforting that I
extended her field, and had an ambulance placed at her command that she
might visit other hospitals. After that she made the rounds among the
hospitals at Washington, going day by day from one hospital to another.
Everywhere her coming was hailed with joy. Mothers and wives who were
watching hopelessly beside their dying ones were lifted in heart and
hope towards God and heaven. Men who had been strong in battle to do
and to dare, but who now lay sorely wounded and weak, and heart and
flesh well-nigh failing them, were lifted on billows of hope and faith
and felt strong to live and to do, or to suffer and die.

Thousands were cheered and saved from despair by this wonderful singer
of the hospitals.

I found her afterwards in other work, equal to the management of large
interests. She could have taken charge of a special-diet kitchen, but
I have always thanked God that her time was given instead to songs in
the hospitals. She has changed her name since then. She is now the wife
of a Congregational minister; but her voice still holds, by its sweet,
sympathetic cadences, the listening congregations.




A YOUNG NURSE AT GETTYSBURG.


Little Sadie Bushman, who was not quite ten years old at the time of
the battle of Gettysburg, proved herself a little heroine. Mr. and
Mrs. Bushman, learning that the battle would rage in all probability
on or near their premises, sent this child with her brother to her
grandmother’s, two miles away, while the parents gathered up the other
children and undertook to follow.

Sadie took hold of her brother’s hand, and they hurried on as fast as
their feet could carry them. But it was not long before their pathway
led them into the thick of the fight along Seminary Ridge. The roar of
the artillery was continuous, but they could not retreat. There came
a blinding flash and a deafening roar. A shell whizzed past them. A
gray-haired officer seized the children, and hurried them down the
ridge toward their destination.

But scarcely less danger awaited them there, as their grandmother’s
house and yard was converted into a hospital. The first work of the
child when she reached this place was to hold a cup of water to a
soldier’s lips while one of his legs was sawed off.

She was separated from her parents two weeks before they knew she
was alive, but all that time she was ministering to the wounded
soldiers. She carried soup and broth, and fed those who could not
help themselves. She worked under the orders of the surgeons, and
was furnished with supplies by the Christian Commission as long as
the hospitals were kept open in Gettysburg. She is now a married
woman--Sadie Bushman Junkerman--and lives near Oakland, Cal.; but the
scenes of the Gettysburg battle years ago are vividly remembered by
her.




A BUT’FUL GUV’MENT MULE.


After the fall of Richmond it was found that the people were in a very
destitute condition, many of them being almost in a state of starvation.

Every agency was at once used to furnish them with food.

The government issued rations as they came in, and the Sanitary and
Christian Commissions distributed large supplies.

Among those who assisted in distributing the supplies of the Christian
Commission was the Rev. John O. Foster, now living in Chicago, Ill.

Each day the supplies would be issued according to the amount on hand
and the number standing in line.

Slowly the procession would march up with baskets to get what was
offered; black and white, rich and poor, old and young, all fared and
shared alike.

One evening after the issue had been made and the room cleared, an old
colored man, who had been sitting off in one corner on a box, arose
and shuffled along towards Mr. Foster. Taking off his old torn hat he
made a low bow.

“Why, you’re too late; why didn’t you come up when the others did?”

“No, massa, I izent. Ben’s done gone and got my rashuns. I’se cum har
on bizness.”

“Well, what can I do for you?”

“I’ze mos’ ’shamed to tell you, Capt’n,” and he put his old hat to his
face and chuckled heartily. Then continued, “You see, Capt’n, day’s
sellin’ lot uv guv’ment mules cheap, mighty cheap, mos’ as cheap as
dirt, and I cud make a fortin if I could buy one; day’s sellin’ for
twenty dollars, massa--but’ful guv’ment mules.” Then there was an
awkward pause.

“Well?”

“I thot mebbe you’d len’ me de money.”

Foster laughed heartily.

“How would you ever pay me back?”

“By haulin’; dar’s a big speculation in it; make a fortin right off.”

“Where will you get a wagon?”

“Oh, I’ze got a wagin; one ole massa throde away and I mended up. An’
I’ze got ropes and ebery ting ’cept de mule; dat’s all I want now.”

“You think you will pay me back?”

“Sartin, massa. If I don’t pay, I guvs up de mule.”

Again Mr. Foster laughed at the thought of that mule coming back on his
hands.

“Well, I think you ought to have the mule now,” was Foster’s generous
reply; “and here is twenty dollars to buy one, but you must pay it
back,” and he handed him a ten-dollar and two five-dollar bills.

“My Lor, massa! Neber had so much money ’fore in all my life. If I dun
fail to pay it back, de mule’s yourn, sure.”

“Now, don’t allow yourself to be robbed or cheated out of it.”

“No, massa; I hain’t goin’ to let nobody know I’ze got nuthin’ till I
git hole on de mule.”

Two days passed, and he saw nothing of the colored man. On the evening
of the third day the colored man came in late, and took a seat in the
corner on a box. But after all had left the room he came close up to
Foster with his hand on his pocket.

“Well, did you get the mule?”

“Yes, massa; I got de most beautifullest mule dat you ever seed--de
bes’ kind uv government mule.” Then he took from his pocket two clean,
crisp five-dollar bills, and handed them to Mr. Foster. “’Fore Sat’day
night I gwine to pay all, I ’spects; I’ze doin’ a busten bus’ness.”

The next Saturday evening the colored man was there; and as soon as the
room was cleared he came forward, and, making sure that no one else
would see, he took out quite a roll of bills, and from them selected a
clean, crisp ten-dollar bill and handed it to Mr. Foster.

“How in the world did you make so much money?”

“I tole you, massa, der war a speculashun in it, an’ der war. Me and de
mule and Ben arned ev’ry dollah. He’s the beautifullest mule you ever
seed. Ben brung him round so as you could see ’em.”

Mr. Foster went to the door. There, sure enough, stood a good, strong
mule, as docile, as quiet and sedate, as though he had not hauled the
artillery into the fight, and stood near the big guns amid the thunders
of battle; for Ben said, with great pride,--

“Dis mule is one uv dem best mules dat pulled de big guns ober de
hills. Oh, he’s an awful strong hos!”

Little Ben sat on a board placed as a seat at the front of the wagon,
his white, even teeth showing from ear to ear, and his eyes sparkling
with gladness. Ben managed to buy a lot on a back alley and build
himself a shanty and a little stable for the government mule.

Judging from his thrift, he is, no doubt, if alive, one of the wealthy
colored men of Richmond now.




COULD YOU GET ME A RAW ONION AND SOME SALT?


A little company of my best workers were sent to Wilmington, N.C., in
charge of my secretary, Mary Shelton, in the spring of 1865, to care
for the sick being gathered there, and the half-starved prisoners being
sent in for exchange.

The dangers and hardships of the journey were very great; but after
many delays they finally reached there and were able to render valuable
service.

Among these chosen workers was Amanda Shelton, now Mrs. Stewart of
Mount Pleasant, Ia., who, strong of body and courageous of soul,
was untiring in her ministrations. One day, as she walked among the
hundreds of the sick and half-starved men, ministering to them as best
she could, the surgeon of the ward called her attention to a soldier
who lay as one dead.

“That man,” he said, “is starving to death. We can’t get him to eat
anything. If you can tempt him to eat he may possibly recover.”

Miss Shelton went to the soldier, and tried to get his attention; but
he lay with closed eyes, in seeming indifference. She tried to tempt
him by mentioning every delicacy she could think of; but he shook his
head and moaned impatiently.

As she remained standing beside his cot, trying to think of something
else, he opened his eyes, and, looking her earnestly in the face, asked
in pitiful, appealing tones,--

“Say, miss, don’t you think you could get me a raw onion and some salt?”

“Yes, I think I can,” she answered, and hastened away to try to find
some onions.

Fortunately, a lot of supplies had just come in, and a sack of onions
was among the goods received.

She hastened back with an onion in her hand and a cup of salt. He
seized the onion eagerly, and began eating it as one would eat an apple
or a peach, dipping it in the salt cup each time as he ate greedily.

The onion and salt was the balm of life to him; and from that time
he began to amend, and was soon able to be about the ward and eat
everything the surgeons would allow him to.

“Oh, that onion did the business for me! If I ever get home I will
raise a big lot of them,” he said.

Shortly afterwards he was shipped North, and as the war soon afterwards
closed, no doubt he reached his home safely.




MEN WHO COMMANDED THEMSELVES AND DID NOT SWEAR.


The Mississippi River was very much swollen in the spring of 1863,
and a bayou near Helena offered a possible channel in the direction
of Vicksburg. It was broad and deep enough to admit the passage of
steamers and gunboats, but too narrow for a boat to turn around.

A fleet of steamers, bearing a well-chosen force, and accompanied by
gunboats, was sent down this bayou. The fleet of boats had not gone far
till the way was found blockaded. Large trees had been cut down, so
that in falling they bridged the narrow stream from shore to shore. But
determined men can overcome almost any obstacle.

They did not stop to cut the trees to pieces, but loosened them from
the stumps, attached ropes and chains to them, and with their hands,
by main force, pulled them out onto the dry land. Overhanging branches
had to be cut away, and yet all the outworks of the boats were torn
to pieces. Finding that this channel of approach was impracticable, a
retrograde movement was made. There was but one way to get the boats
out, and that was to back out stern foremost.

But while they were pushing on, the enemy had been felling the trees
behind them, and the same hard work of pulling them out by human hands
became necessary; and it was done.

It was my privilege to see the fleet of boats as it came in to join the
force opposite Vicksburg, and a more dilapidated, ragged-looking lot of
boats and men was never seen on the earth.

They looked as though they had been through a dozen battles. Little
was left of the boats but the substantial framework. The flags hung in
tatters; the smoke-stacks had been carried away; the pilot-houses torn
to pieces; the guards and outworks were gone; the wheel-houses torn
away, and the broken wheels left bare.

As heroes returning from battle, the soldiers of that expedition
were welcomed by hearty cheers, as boat after boat came in, by their
comrades. One boat, the first to enter the bayou, was the last to come
in, and arrived about ten o’clock at night.

The landing was made alongside our Sanitary boat, where the agents and
workers of the Sanitary and Christian Commissions were quartered. There
were a number of ladies there; and their sympathies were deeply moved,
that men who had been out on such hard service should be marched out
through the rain and mud at so late an hour to make their camp.

“Why can they not stay under shelter where they are till morning?” was
the indignant question that passed from lip to lip, as we stood out on
the guards looking down upon them.

By the flambeau that burned with a weird, lurid light, we could dimly
see them fall into line and march away, with their knapsacks on their
backs and their guns in their hands. But they were a jolly set; and
as they plunged into the mud, which was nearly knee-deep, some wag
among them cried out, in imitation of boatmen taking the depth of the
channel, “No bottom! no bottom!” Every soldier seemed to instantly
join in the chorus; and “No bottom! no bottom!” rang out from hundreds
of throats, which was soon varied to “No chickens!” “No coffee!” “No
’taters!” as they plunged on in the darkness.

Of course such conduct was not consistent with military dignity, and
so the colonel tried to stop them. But the noise was so loud that he
failed at first to make himself heard.

“Halt!” he cried in thunder tones.

Immediately there was entire quiet; every man stood still just where he
was to hear what his commanding officer had to say; not a foot moved.

“Soldiers, you forget yourselves,” said the colonel. “I know it is
raining, and the mud is deep, and the fare and the work have been hard;
but you are in the midst of a great army, the commanding general’s
quarters are near; what will be thought of such noise and confusion?
You misrepresent yourselves; we will march quietly to camp. Forward,
march!”

Not a passionate or profane word was spoken. We were all curious to
know who the officer was who could command himself as well as his men.

The next day I was at General Grant’s quarters; and I inquired as to
who the officer was, and told the story.

“I do not know him,” I said earnestly, “but I am sure he ought to be
promoted. A man who can govern himself as he did last night ought to
wear a general’s shoulder-straps.”

“That was Colonel Legget. He is a good man, and a very fine officer,”
was the general’s reply.

“Do you know, General, that there is a great deal of profanity among
the officers and men?”

“Yes, I know; I am sorry that it is so.”

“I am glad to hear you say that you are sorry.”

“I never swear.”

“Indeed! It is encouraging to hear a man of your influence say that. I
am glad you have so much moral principle.”

“It is not moral principle,” he answered quickly. “I never contracted
the habit of profanity. I should not utter an oath if I knew what
I was about; and, not having the habit, I would not likely do so
unconsciously. Profanity does not comport with the dignity of the
military service.”

“No; nor with Christianity, which lifts a higher standard. I wish you
could have said that Christian principles furnished an added restraint.”

“I believe in the Christian system, and have great respect for
Christian people. They are doing a grand work in the army; but I am not
a Christian as you understand it.”

“I wish you were. You walk amid dangers, and many of us feel anxious
about you--many prayers go up for your safety. I would feel that you
were safer for both worlds if you were a Christian.”

“I would like to be a Christian.”

Just then General Rawlins, one of the grandest men of the war, who was
his chief of staff, came forward with some documents for examination,
and the close conversation was interrupted, and I took my leave. I am
glad to know that afterward he professed faith in the Divine Redeemer.




HE DIED CHEERING THE FLAG.


A. M. Shipman, an Ohio volunteer, who was confined for eight months as
a hostage, was in Vicksburg jail during the siege, and was released
when Pemberton surrendered.

For a time he had a fellow-prisoner named John B. Marsh, who had been
forced into the Rebel army. Marsh made an attempt to join the Union
forces, but was recaptured, and condemned to be shot. Just before his
execution he managed to get the following note into Mr. Shipman’s
hands:--

  “KIND FRIEND,--If ever you reach our happy lines, have this put in
  the Northern papers, that my father, the Rev. Leonard Marsh, who
  lives in Maine, may know what has become of me, and what I was shot
  for. I am to be shot for defending my country. I love her, and am
  willing to die for her. Tell my parents that I am also happy in the
  Lord. My future is bright. I hope to speak to you as I pass out to
  die.”

One of the guards told Mr. Shipman afterward, that when young Marsh was
placed in position ready to receive the fire of his executioners, he
was told he could speak if he desired to do so. Looking calmly upon
the crowd for a moment, he shouted out in strong, clear tones, “Three
cheers for the old flag and the Union!” There was no response to his
patriotic sentiment. He paused for a moment, and then shouted at the
top of his voice, “Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!” A volley of musketry struck
him in the breast, and stopped the beating of his brave, loyal heart.




HOW PRESIDENT LINCOLN RECEIVED THE NEWS OF SHERIDAN’S VICTORY.


I was personally acquainted with President Lincoln, and sat talking
with him in his public office when the telegram was brought in
announcing General Sheridan’s second victory in the Shenandoah Valley,
which resulted in the defeat of General Early.

When the messenger came in, Mr. Lincoln was talking very earnestly; and
although he laid down the telegram with the announcement, “An important
telegram, Mr. President,” Mr. Lincoln took no notice of it.

The messenger went as far as the door of the room, and seeing that Mr.
Lincoln had not taken up the telegram he returned, and laying it a
little nearer to him on the desk, repeated,--

“An important telegram, Mr. President.”

But as the president kept on talking, and took no notice of it, the
messenger retired.

He was at that time talking of the sanitary condition of the army; the
relation of food to health, and the influence of the special-diet
kitchen system in restoring the soldiers to health, and its effect in
lessening the number of furloughs.

I, too, talked earnestly; as, while pushing the work of the
special-diet kitchens, I believed most heartily in furloughs.

But earnest as I was, I was exceedingly anxious to know the contents of
that telegram.

There was during that interview, that far away look in his eyes, that
those seeing could never forget.

At last he paused and took up the despatch, and after looking over it
read it aloud.

“This is good news indeed,” he said, and a smile lit up his rugged
features as he went on with his comments.

“This Sheridan,” he said, “is a little Irishman, but he is a big
fighter.”

Soon after I arose to take my leave. He, too, arose and stood like a
giant before me, as he extended his hand, and said, “Well, success to
you. Come in again.”

I did not realize his greatness at that time, but now all the world
knows that Abraham Lincoln will stand out a colossal figure as long as
American history is read. A thousand years will not dim the lustre of
his name or fame.

When his armies were pushed back till they built their camp-fires under
the shadow of the nation’s Capitol, and treason glared at him from
the near palaces, and the ship of state rocked in the trough of the
waves of civil war and social revolution, he stood firm and strong at
the helm, with calm, unwavering trust in God. In a rougher mould, he
possessed the majesty of a Clay, the sagacity of a Franklin, the wit
of a Ben Jonson, the benevolence of a Howard, and the social qualities
of the Adamses. No heart in all the land throbbed with a truer,
kindlier charity towards all, than did the great heart of Abraham
Lincoln when the assassin’s bullet stopped its generous beating. Among
philanthropists, in all ages, Lincoln will stand out as The Great
Emancipator, who brought liberty to an enslaved and cruelly wronged
race; and Right will laurel-crown him as a martyr.

No one bullet ever went forth on a deadlier mission, or struck so heavy
a blow to friends and foes alike, as did the bullet that laid Abraham
Lincoln low in the dust.

Victor and vanquished, who had come up out of a great struggle with
their garments rolled in blood to ground their arms at his feet, and
who had received his benediction of peace and good-will to all, were
alike mourners when the assassin’s bullet did its deadly work.

It was as though there was one dead in every house. The mourners went
about the streets uncomforted. Men forgot their love for gold and
their lust for power; statesmen groped about like blind men for some
hand to lead. _The world was in mourning_; for all the world knew that
he had come to the kingdom for such a time as that.

The lives of such men as Abraham Lincoln are measured by deeds, and
not by length of days. His work was wrought in a few short years. He
answered the question of the wisdom and solidity of a republican form
of government by hurling its betrayers from power. He established human
liberty on the immutable rock of intelligent public sentiment. When he
proclaimed above the sleeping heroes of Gettysburg, “a government of
the people, by the people, and for the people,” he sounded forth an
endless jubilee that has echoed and re-echoed through the world, till
the people of every kindred and tongue have heard the glad tidings,
and human slavery has been branded as a crime, and outlawed by all the
civilized nations of the earth.

The saviour of his people, the liberator of the oppressed, the
great-hearted friend of humanity, he will stand out a colossal figure
in history while men love liberty more than life, while men love
freedom more than chains, and while human sympathy links us to each
other and draws us toward God and heaven.

It seems fitting, as there was not one of all the millions who loved
him, and who would have shielded him at any cost, but knew not of his
peril, that the flag he loved should have become his avenger, and
caught the foot of the assassin in its loyal folds, and hurled him away
to certain death. That flag, kept securely in a glass case, is held
sacred in the treasure-house of the nation. The swift-footed years have
gone by, till _twenty-nine_ have passed; but Lincoln is not forgotten:
his memory is as fresh and sweet as it was at the first.

The robins come to build their nests, and the bluebirds sing their
sweet spring songs, just as they did twenty-nine years ago this
April-time; but he is not forgotten, for his work goes on. The
flag that Lincoln upheld is the banner honored of all nations, the
principles he sustained and taught are more and more becoming the
heritage of the world, and will be universal.




HOW I GOT THE COTTON.


A few days after the first fleet ran the blockade at Vicksburg, another
fleet, composed entirely of wooden steamers, ran through that fiery
channel.

The plans of the government coming to my knowledge, I sent a note to
the medical director, offering to ship a lot of hospital supplies, and
asking him to designate the boat on which I should ship them. My note
came back indorsed,--

  “Send supplies down on the _Tigress_.”

I still have that letter on file.

The _Tigress_ was a trim, stanch little craft which General Grant had
used for headquarters. And feeling sure the swift, trim little steamer
would make the passage safely, I shipped a heavy lot of supplies on her.

There were six wooden steamers, with barges in tow, laden with army
supplies.

On the night of the 26th of April, 1863, they ran the blockade.

All the important machinery was protected by bales of cotton and bales
of hay.

All the boats got through safely, except the _Tigress_.

In the midst of the fiery channel a solid shot cut through the heavy
gunwales of the barge she was towing, and went through her hull, just
below the water-level. Her crew deserted her, and made their escape in
the small boats which were there for that purpose.

She filled with water so slowly that she drifted down into the Union
lines before she sank, sinking near the shore on the Louisiana side of
the river.

Two days afterwards I received a letter from an Iowa colonel, whose
name I have forgotten, whose regiment was in camp opposite where the
_Tigress_ sank, informing me that the men of his command were willing
to wade out neck-deep and secure the cotton about the engine of the
_Tigress_, if the commanding general would give it to me for sanitary
purposes; and that as he was coming up to Young’s Point with empty
wagons for supplies, he would gladly deliver it there.

I was very much perplexed as to what I had best do, but finally sent
the colonel’s letter to General Grant, who had gone below Vicksburg
with his army, with a brief letter, saying that “If the granting of
this request is entirely consistent with your sense of honor, and
the best interest of yourself and of the government, I would be glad
to receive the cotton, as I shipped a heavy lot of supplies on the
_Tigress_, and they have all been lost.”

As soon as my letter was received, the order was issued, and sent up
by a special messenger. I sent it immediately to that generous Iowa
colonel, with a most kindly message.

I do not know how deep the Iowa soldiers waded out to secure the
cotton; but I do know that a heavy lot came up in good condition very
promptly, and that I shipped it to St. Louis to Partrage & Co. for
sale, and that it was sold for $1,950, which I charged to my account,
and which enabled me to more than double the amount of supplies I had
lost.

I see by bills in my possession that I bought immense quantities of
supplies in St. Louis. There is one bill of seventy-five bushels of
dried apples, while all the onions in the market were bought up,
and lemons and other antiscorbutics; and when our forces surrounded
Vicksburg, heavy supplies were rushed in to meet their pressing wants,
especially those who were sick and wounded in hospital and camp.

Somehow I lost the address of that Iowa colonel; but although more than
thirty years have passed, I have never ceased to feel the most profound
gratitude to that colonel and his men for their heroic services. If
this should fall under the eyes of any of them, I should be very glad
to hear from them, and to thank them personally.




THE SEQUEL TO “UNCLE TOM’S CABIN.”


The name of Harriet Beecher Stowe recalls the story of “Uncle Tom’s
Cabin.” It was a story that thrilled and moved the people of this
country as no other story has ever done. Its influence was not a
sentimental and transitory one. The shafts of truth were sent home to
men’s consciences, and were abiding; they live to-day.

It may not, however, be generally known that the hero of “Uncle Tom’s
Cabin” _did not die till a few years ago_--in 1883.

I knew him personally, and have heard the story from his own lips. Mrs.
Stowe was acquainted with Uncle Tom, and read a sketch of his life
which had been published by the Anti-Slavery Society before she wrote
her book.

His history and work after the beating he had received, which brought
him down to death’s door, are more remarkable than those that had
preceded, which she records, and where she leaves him dead. He
recovered, and afterwards had an opportunity to escape with his family
from slavery. He used such sagacity in planning his journey, preparing
for months for the great event, that he was able to elude his pursuers,
and reach Canada in safety. Two of his four children were too small to
travel on foot such a long journey. So he made a sack with straps over
his shoulders, and carried them on his back out of slavery. At times
his back was so sore, from the heat and friction, that the blood ran
down to his heels.

It was a heroic effort for freedom for himself, and his children, and
his wife.

He was, as far as I am able to judge, the most remarkable colored man
that has ever lived on this continent.

His home, which I have visited, was on the Sydenham River, near the
town of Dresden, Ontario, Canada. It was a most comfortable one.

He did not know one letter from another when he reached Canada. He
became a scholar, and in a few years spoke the English language
correctly and without the Southern accent.

He had neither money nor credit when he settled in Canada, but he owned
at the time of his death one of the finest farms in the Dominion.

He had never studied oratory, but he became one of the most eloquent
speakers in Canada and England. He could fill Exeter Hall, England,
without effort. Lords and ladies entertained him at their castles, and
on invitation of Queen Victoria he visited her at Windsor Palace.

His name was Josiah Henson. I visited him in August, 1882, at his home.
He was then nearly ninety-three years of age. In March, 1883, having
turned into his ninety-fourth year, he died. His mind was clear, his
conversation intelligent and logical. The pathetic story of his running
away from slavery would have been, if touched by Mrs. Stowe’s pen, far
in advance of anything in “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.”

He was a friend of the slaves, and for several years before, and
especially during the war, was one of the conductors and guides on the
underground railroad to Canada.

He founded a colony near Dresden.

He was well acquainted with Mrs. Stowe, and frequently visited her at
her home in Boston.

He wrote his life before she wrote “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.”

His anti-slavery speeches in England won him a great reputation for
oratory.

The last time he was in London, Queen Victoria invited him to an
interview with her at Windsor Palace; and after lunch was served to
him and his party, he was ushered into the presence of the Queen,
in the great drawing-room of the palace, where all the lords- and
ladies-in-waiting had been gathered in. The interview was a most
interesting one.

When she told him that she was glad to see him, and spoke
appreciatively of his services, he responded easily and frankly:--

“I am glad to see you, my sovereign, and to be so graciously received
by you. But I do not forget that I am an alien, and that I was a slave.
I came flying for life and liberty to your dominion; and when my weary
feet touched the soil over which you reign I was a free man. I knelt
reverently, and kissed the earth, and thanked my God that wherever
your flag floated the slave was free and safe. I desire to assure your
Majesty, that among the millions of your subjects, although I am one of
the humblest, there are none more true and loyal than Josiah Henson.”

Her Majesty was visibly moved. Prince Leopold and Princess Beatrice,
two of her children, were on either side of her during this interview,
which lasted for some time. She took from the hand of Beatrice a little
package and handed it to him, saying:--

“Accept this as a small token of my appreciation of your valuable
services to the slaves in America, and as a token of my interest in
your race, especially those who have settled in Canada.”

The package contained a small picture of herself set in gold, resting
on a gold easel. As that was kept in the safe at the bank I did not see
it; but I did see the oil painting of “Uncle Tom,” as everybody called
him, presented to him by the Anti-Slavery Society of Boston, about the
time Mrs. Stowe’s book, “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” came out.




SECRETARY STANTON’S GENEROUS GIFT.


In October, 1863, I came up from the hospitals in the front, to attend
a sanitary convention at Muscatine, Iowa.

As I was legally commissioned the sanitary agent of the State by
Governor Samuel J. Kirkwood, having been elected to that position by
the Legislature of Iowa, my presence was greatly desired by the workers.

The convention was large and representative. But my own heart was
greatly burdened with touching messages from dying soldiers to their
wives and children. In the midst of the convention I boldly announced
my purpose to try to establish a home for soldiers’ orphan children.
The proposition was received with the wildest enthusiasm; and the
convention took action at once, not only indorsing the movement, but
pledging financial support.

There was no precedent to follow, as there was no institution of the
kind in all the world.

I was elected president of “The Orphans’ Home Association,” but
declined, and Governor Stone, the newly elected governor of the State,
was chosen. The ablest men and women of the State were brought into the
organization, and the Home was duly opened in a rented house.

The house, although large, was soon crowded to overflowing, and we
could get no larger building that would accommodate the hundreds who
were applying for admission.

A committee sent out to search for more commodious quarters reported
new, fine barracks on a piece of confiscated land of thirty acres,
adjoining the town of Davenport.

The barracks were new and well-built, and had cost $46,000.

The leading men of Iowa, as well as the women, were actively enlisted
in the work.

Ex-Governor Kirkwood, and his private secretary, N. H. Brainard,
Governor Stone, Judge Lowe, Judge Coles, Chaplain Ingalls, John Parvin,
and many others whose names were a guaranty of honest and faithful
work, were active.

I was selected to go to Washington and secure these barracks as a gift
from the government, if possible. If I could not obtain them as a gift,
I was authorized to offer $1,000 a year as rent for them. I protested
strongly against being sent on such an important mission; but I was
overruled, and was obliged to accept the duty.

When I reached Washington, October, 1865, I went to the
surgeon-general’s office, and made known my mission, and secured an
official statement that those barracks would not be needed for hospital
purposes. I want to say in this connection that Surgeon-General J. K.
Barnes had always co-operated with me most heartily in all my work.

I then called on Quartermaster-General Meigs, the man who with such
wonderful executive ability fed and clothed the great armies of the
republic, furnishing quarters and equipments, and paid their wages with
an honesty and fidelity that have never been questioned.

I had often met him before; and no one who ever saw him could forget
his honest, rugged, but kindly face.

When I made known my mission, he looked surprised and pleased, and then
said,--

“Well, now, that is certainly a good use to put these deserted barracks
to.”

“General,” I said, “all I want you to do, is to say officially to the
government that they will not be needed for military purposes.”

“They were never needed; they ought never to have been built. It was a
waste of money.”

“Then, General, you can certainly say they will not be needed for
military purposes. Please say that officially.”

He took up his pen and wrote out a statement, informing the government
that the new cavalry barracks at Davenport, Ia., would not be needed
for military purposes, “even if hostilities were resumed.” His
statement covered over two pages.

Thus armed, I went to the office of the Secretary of War.

I had become acquainted with Mr. Stanton under the most favorable
circumstances.

The governor of Iowa had commended me to him, and early in 1862
obtained for me a general order for transportation of myself and
supplies and rations. And later, when I called on him personally, I was
the bearer of letters of introduction and commendation from some of his
most influential and trusted friends.

Afterwards he always seemed glad to see me, and graciously granted all
my requests.

He was prompt and clear in all his business methods, and was by far the
best listener I have ever met. When I talked to him there was no need
of repeating; he apprehended my meaning. When he talked, there was no
room to misunderstand him. There was no fuss and bluster, or pretence,
or attempt to show off himself or his authority; and that pleased me.
I went, therefore, to his office with great hope and courage. When I
asked to see the Secretary of War, a young, jolly-looking officer came
forward and asked,--

“What can I do for you, madam?”

“I wish to see Mr. Stanton.”

“Mr. Stanton is in Boston. I am Major Eccles, acting Secretary of War,
and will attend to any business you may have to transact.”

I informed him as to my mission. He laughed heartily.

“That, madam, is a little beyond my prerogative. I don’t feel
authorized to give away the property of the government.”

I put myself at once in telegraphic communication with Mr. Stanton. He
asked some questions as to the legal status of the institution, and
that was all I heard that day.

The next morning I took another requisition to the War Department. It
was for hospital supplies. I distinctly remember the first few items,
1,800 blankets; 2,500 sheets; 3,000 pillow-cases; 1,500 pillows, and so
on, till everything I could remember that could be of use to the Home
were enumerated.

When I handed the document to Major Eccles, I said,--

“Here is a small requisition I should like to have go in with the
application for the property.”

“This is a small requisition,” and he laughed heartily as he read the
list aloud.

“Yes, sir,” I said with great gravity. “This is a small requisition;
but with the help of the generous people of Iowa, I hope we shall be
able to get along with that.”

“Now seriously, on what grounds have you a right to ask these supplies
from the government?”

“Well, sir, I call your attention to the fact, that at the beginning of
the war the government had very few hospital supplies. The loyal people
of the North helped to fit them up. The loyal State of Iowa sent nearly
$200,000 worth of supplies into the military hospitals. Now, all I ask
is that you give us back a few of the supplies that we gave you, as you
no longer need them.”

“You are certainly entitled to them. I will do what I can to get this
through.”

The Iowa delegation at Washington, and the officers in the War
Department, including Major Eccles, became greatly interested, and
anxious that Secretary Stanton’s answer should be favorable.

When the answer came it was:--

“Will you accept the property subject to the approval of Congress?”

I flashed back my answer as quickly as possible:--

“Yes; and will get the bill through without annoyance to you.”

As I was obliged to leave the War Department before an answer
came, Major Eccles drove up to the house of my friend, where I was
stopping, with the telegraphic order, turning over the property to
the Association. The gift of the barracks and the hospital supplies
aggregated $52,000.

I was lifted to the clouds, figuratively speaking, and rushed to the
telegraph-office, and sent off despatches to the newspapers in Iowa.
The next morning all the leading papers in Iowa appeared with great
head-lines announcing the magnificent gift.

Before Congress met we had bought out the heirs of the confiscated
property, remodelled and plastered the buildings, and had nearly five
hundred soldiers’ orphan children comfortably housed there.

Hon. Hiram Price, a member of Congress from the Davenport District,
took charge of our bill, and carried it through Congress without
annoyance to Mr. Stanton.

The fact that we had possession, and were housing and supporting so
many soldiers’ orphan children in these barracks, made opposition
almost impossible.

With this valuable property in our possession, it was an easy task to
induce the State Legislature to take this burden off our hands and
make it a State institution. The frame barracks have been replaced by
substantial brick buildings; but the Home is still conducted on the
cottage plan, and is one of the finest institutions of the State.

Edwin M. Stanton’s generous action in giving this timely help to a weak
society secured the success of a worthy institution, that has educated
and sent out thousands of children to be good and useful citizens.

Mr. Stanton was one of the strong, true, honest men who made Mr.
Lincoln’s administration a success. He was intensely loyal, and
intolerant to treason and self-seeking, and he made traitors tremble
on both sides of the line. He was, more than any other man, the
balance-wheel in the complicated machinery of the government which held
and regulated its internal workings.

He was a clear and close thinker, a keen and sagacious discerner of
human motives, a tireless worker, and was too open and frank to conceal
his opinions of men and things.

Too unselfish to enrich himself, he toiled on, literally killing
himself at work, and dying poor. When passion and prejudice have passed
away he will receive his full meed of praise.




THE SPECIAL-DIET KITCHEN WORK.


No part of the army service was so defective, during the first two
years of the war, as the cooking department in the United States
government hospitals.

Few of the men employed as cooks in these hospitals were trained or
skilled; most of them had obtained their knowledge of cookery after
being assigned to duty, under most unfavorable circumstances, and
without the proper facilities for doing their work.

One general kitchen provided the food for all--the sick, the wounded,
and the dying, as well as the nurses and convalescents.

Where there were women nurses in a hospital, and they could get a
little stove of their own, special dishes were prepared for the worst
patients; but there was no general system of providing dainty and
suitable diet for the thousands in need of delicate food in home-like
preparation.

The supplies coming from the generous people of the North occasioned
great anxiety.

The surgeons forbade their distribution at the bedside of the patients,
on the ground that something might be given which would endanger their
lives or retard their recovery, and ordered them turned over to the
commissary. Often supplies thus turned over failed to reach the sick or
wounded.

It was under these trying circumstances that the plan of a system of
special-diet kitchens came to me,--clearly and definitely, as a flash
from the skies,--like a divine inspiration.

It was in December, 1863, that the thought came to me, and I hastened
at once to put the plan into execution.

Everybody seemed to accept the plan with enthusiasm; and the Sanitary
and Christian Commission, and the officers and surgeons of the army,
all hastened to co-operate with me in inaugurating and accomplishing
this great reform.

The plan in itself was very simple and practical, and was entirely
satisfactory to all parties.

1. The food for those needing special diet was prescribed by the ward
surgeons. A bill of fare was provided, with the name of the patient and
the number of his bed, for every patient put on special diet; and on
this bill the surgeon prescribed his diet by making a mark opposite the
articles the patient was allowed. This plan gave the sick or wounded
man a chance to express his own wants in regard to food, which was a
great advantage.

2. These bills of fare were consolidated by the ward-master, and a copy
sent to the superintendent of the special-diet kitchen, and the bills
were returned to their places again. So with these consolidated lists
before them, the managers of the special-diet kitchen knew just what to
cook, and just the quantity.

3. The food thus ordered was prepared in the special-diet kitchen,
which, although under separate management, was a part of the hospital,
and as completely under the control of the authorities as any other
part of the hospital.

The kitchens were fitted up with ranges and other suitable
conveniences, and were under the management of suitable ladies employed
by the surgeons in charge. A storeroom conveniently near or adjoining
was provided, where the commuted rations of soldiers put on special
diet were stored, also the supplies furnished by the Sanitary and
Christian Commissions; and the woman in charge of the special-diet
kitchen carried the keys.

4. These dietary nurses were _not cooks_; they only superintended the
work. Many of those who worked in these kitchens were soldiers who were
somewhat disabled, or convalescent soldiers who were not able to join
their regiments.

In large hospitals, where one thousand or fifteen hundred were
furnished meals three times a day, the work was divided up, and each
man had his part of the work, and soon became an expert in it. There
were in the large kitchens from twenty-five to thirty men required to
do the work.

The food thus systematically prepared under the watchful eyes of women
competent to govern such a force and direct the work, was brought to
the bedside of the patients in home-like preparation.

No mistake would likely be made in the distribution, as each patient
had at the head of his bed the list of articles of food prescribed by
the surgeon of his ward.

The first kitchen was opened at Cumberland Hospital, Nashville, Tenn.

The Christian Commission of Pittsburg, Pa., sent me the lumber to build
a kitchen, storeroom, and a ladies’ room, and two of the largest ranges
in the market.

Mary E. Moorhead, a wealthy lady of that city, daughter of Hon. J. K.
Moorhead, at that time a member of Congress, and one of Pittsburg’s
most honored citizens, and Hannah Shaw, who has since distinguished
herself in missionary work in China, took charge of that kitchen. Miss
Moorhead has since the close of the war devoted herself to benevolent
work.

The change wrought in that hospital was so marvellous that all the
leading surgeons from Louisville to Chattanooga were anxious for
the establishment of special-diet kitchens in connection with their
hospitals. Many of them could not believe the wonderful stories
circulated as to the great reform wrought in Cumberland Hospital, and,
like the Queen of Sheba, came long distances to see for themselves as
to the truth of the matter, and, like her, confessed that “the half had
not been told them.”

I was most generously sustained in this work by the Christian
Commission, who turned all their supplies into these kitchens, and paid
all the expenses of this service. I was chosen superintendent of the
special-diet kitchen work, which rapidly extended all along the lines
from Vicksburg to Petersburg.

The surgeons accepting this help, agreed to employ the women selected
by me, and allow them to have charge of the supplies furnished for use
in the special-diet kitchens, from the government and the Sanitary
and Christian Commissions. The surgeons had charge of the kitchen,
appointed these women, and directed their work, as in all parts of
their hospitals.

There was no opposition to this work. Mr. Lincoln, Secretary Stanton,
Surgeon-General Barnes, and Assistant-Surgeon-General Wood, gave me
their indorsement and all the aid I needed. It soon became an admitted
fact that thousands of lives were being saved by this supply of better
food, which many of them needed more than they did medicine.

Surgeon-General Barnes became so enthusiastic over the plan that he
appointed a commission of United States army surgeons to consider it,
with a view of adopting it and ingrafting it upon the United States
general hospital system.

I was invited by the surgeon-general to meet with them. The committee
received me most graciously at their regular sittings in Washington,
D. C., and listened with great respect to my explanations; and after
carefully considering my plans, adopted them as a part of the regular
United States hospital system.

To give some idea of the magnitude of the work, out of over one hundred
special-diet kitchens established by me, I give the amount of food in
rations issued from sixteen special-diet kitchens, a record of which I
happen to have now on hand for February, 1865.

                             RATIONS.
  Tea                        100,350
  Coffee                      54,818
  Cocoa                        4,770
  Milk, Cold                  12,194
  Milk, boiled                 9,860
  Milk, Thickened              7,517
  Bread and Milk, Boiled       2,689
  Beef Tea                     7,548
  Beef Essence                 1,699
  Bread and Butter           133,938
  Toast, Buttered             28,539
  Toast, Dry                  23,809
  Toast, Milk                 33,611
  Crackers                    18,999
  Corn Bread                  15,714
  Biscuit                      5,458
  Warm Cakes                   2,629
  Rice                         9,239
  Barley                         492
  Farina                       8,424
  Gruel                        1,589
  Corn Starch                 17,150
  Mush                        10,831
  Soup, Chicken                8,472
  Soup, Mutton                   856
  Soup, Beef                  10,716
  Soup, Barley                   599
  Soup, Oyster                10,193
  Soup, Potato                 2,301
  Soup, Vegetable              4,885
  Beef Steak                  27,623
  Roast Beef                  36,599
  Ham                          3,585
  Chicken                     11,389
  Turkey (only occasionally)     809
  Mutton                       2,357
  Veal                         1,510
  Pork                         2,208
  Hash                         7,925
  Oysters                      5,086
  Fish                         5,721
  Eggs                        15,538
  Potatoes                    47,725
  Turnips                      7,785
  Carrots                      1,070
  Onions                      12,356
  Beets                          271
  Cabbage                     15,059
  Krout                        1,296
  Beans                          494
  Parsnips                     1,291
  Tomatoes                     7,312
  Puddings                    34,249
  Pies                         5,113
  Cakes                        3,485
  Tapioca                      2,772
  Sago                            60
  Blanc-Mange                    807
  Custard                      1,616
  Jellies                      1,763
  Canned Fruit                12,816
  Stewed Fruit                29,266
  Apple Sauce                  7,618
  Apples, Baked               11,774
  Pickles                     20,343
  Lemons                         127
  Cheese                         825
  Cordials, etc                1,940
                            --------
                     Total,  899,472

This was the regular bill of fare in all the special-diet kitchens.
If any one of these articles could not be obtained, they were marked
off. Turkey was only on the list occasionally. It will be seen by
the great variety that the appetites of the patients were consulted.
Nothing, however, was issued without it being ordered by the surgeon in
attendance upon the patient.

Some of the articles furnished on the above list may seem unfit for
sick men; but when we take into consideration that there were many
wounded men who were allowed by the surgeons to eat anything they
might choose, and others who were homesick, or hopelessly ill, or
dying, who in the loneliness of suffering remembered and craved
something because a kind mother’s hand had once prepared such dainties
for them, it is no longer a matter of wonder.

And since the loved ones at home could not cheer them with their
presence and love in their dark hours of suffering, it was a delightful
task for these noble women to substitute home food and words of cheer.

It is the verdict of history that this system of special-diet kitchens
saved thousands of lives. During the last eighteen months of the war,
over two million rations were issued monthly from this long line of
special-diet kitchens, established, many of them, almost under the
guns.




THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC--ITS GLORIES AND ITS DANGERS.


The remarkable growth of the American Republic is without a parallel in
the history of the world.

A hundred years ago she was a feeble nation--in her infancy, and
scarcely recognized by the other nations of the earth. Now she stands
foremost among the governments of the world, and _leads_ the nations in
almost everything.

Her territory is extensive and contiguous, lying between two great
oceans, and bounded on the north and south by navigable lakes and seas.

Her resources are almost boundless. She gluts the markets of the
world with her silver and gold. Her iron and copper ores are rich and
abundant, nearly all the metals needed for the use of her people may be
had for the digging, and she may bedeck her children with the jewels
gathered from her own fields.

She can produce an abundance of cotton, wool, flax, hemp, and silk.
She is already the chief competitor in the cotton markets of Asia,
and from her own looms is clothing her people in muslins and fine
linen, and her daughters in royal purple from her silk factories. Her
food supply is immense. Her grain-fields are broad and rich enough to
supply bread to the millions of her own people, and to meet the needs
of the needy nations of the earth. Her meat supply is so large that
she is glad to share it with all the world. Her fruit yield is ample,
sufficient in variety and abundance to meet the needs of all. Only
a few luxuries are denied her. She could shut herself in, and live
luxuriously on her own products. There is not one thing that comes from
abroad that her people could not live comfortably without. Tea, coffee,
spices, and tropical fruits are not necessary to human life.

Her woods are abundant and fine, equal to any reasonable demand. Her
furniture goes to the ends of the earth.

Her building material is abundant and of superior quality. She
has granite and marble in variety, nearly all kinds of valuable
building-stones, and clays of almost every description. Her potteries
are now doing credible work, and her china and glass wares are
attracting attention in other lands. The new process by which _glass
china_ is produced is a marvellous success.

Her people are intelligent and enterprising. The rich resources of the
country have stimulated their activities and awakened their inventive
genius till they are the leaders in the work of the world, and the
most thrifty and enterprising nation on the face of the globe.

They have tunnelled the mountains; bridged the rivers; created
water-ways; made the wilderness to bloom; and chained steam and
electricity as motive powers to their chariot-wheels, to do their
bidding on the land and under the sea.

A system of government has been established superior to any other known
before among men; and a system of free schools that has no parallel on
the face of the earth has made the people intelligent and efficient for
the practical work of life, far beyond other nations, taken as a mass.
And yet with all these blessings, dangers threaten her.

One of the dangers that threaten this glorious Republic is the foreign
emigration. Attracted by her rich resources and the marvellous stories
of her wealth, the people of other nations are coming to share our
blessings. The danger is not in the number who come, but in the
character of many of these new-comers.

They come to a new nation with old habits, and old prejudices, and
another language. They are a misfit. They care nothing for the American
Republic and her free institutions, only as they will add to their
physical comfort and personal aggrandizement. They do not assimilate
or become Americanized. Many of them are ignorant and brutish. They
huddle together; they are as much foreigners as they were in Hungary or
Sicily. They remain foreigners, and they have nothing in common with us
except their physical needs.

Among them are the vicious and the idle. Our thoroughfares are filled
with tramps and beggars. The prisons of our cities are crowded with
foreign criminals and paupers. Almost two-thirds of all the criminals
and paupers in our large cities are foreign born. Criminals flying from
justice; paupers who, from infirmities of body and mind, or from idle
and dissolute habits, must be supported,--find a refuge here.

Statesmen may well question as to how long this Republic can take into
her bosom, and accord all the rights of citizenship to, the criminals
and paupers of the world, without danger.

But there is danger from our own people. The accumulation of great
wealth, without a corresponding increase of brains and culture,
is giving us an undesirable aristocracy. They ape the old, effete
aristocracies of the Old World.

They discount American institutions, and “_adore a title_.” They try
to rule business, politics, and social life. But this evil will be
overcome.

In this country, where there are no entailed estates, death equalizes
wealth and power every few years.




MEMORIAL DAY.


  Bow low, fair clouds, and kiss the earth,
  Where Human Freedom had her birth,
  Where heroes struggled in the fight,
  And patriots died for human right.
  Bow low, and rainbow glories shed
  Above a nation’s gallant dead;
  Then bear the news o’er land and sea,
  Earth’s fettered millions may be free.

  Fly low, bright birds with painted wings,
  And join the song a nation sings,
  A glad, and sacred jubilee,
  For God has set his people free.
  Sing of the flag with starry field,
  Sing of the eagle and the shield,
  Sing of the victories of Peace,
  Sing of the time when wars shall cease.

  Bloom on, sweet flowers, thy perfume shed
  Above each soldier’s lowly bed;
  Kind nature’s fairest tribute bring,
  And clothe each mound with flowers of spring.
  Look up, with loving, dewy eyes,
  Into the blue recording skies,
  And pledge in red, and white, and blue,
  That May flowers ever will be true.

  Let all the people gather near,
  And bow themselves with reverent fear;
  For God with mighty, outstretched hand
  Has graciously redeemed our land.
  Come, Peace, and spread thy sheltering wing;
  Come, Love, thy sweetest tribute bring;
  Come, all, and join a sacred lay
  To celebrate Memorial Day.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.
